 Section: Genesis_Rabbah
Rabbi Hoshaya the Great began: “I1The speaker is Wisdom (the Torah) personified. was with Him as an amon, a delight day after day…” (Proverbs 8:30) – amon means a child’s caretaker, amon means covered, amon means hidden, and some say amon means greatness. Amon means a child’s caretaker, as it says: “As a caretaker [omen] carries a nursing child” (Numbers 11:12). Amon means covered, as it says: “Those covered [ha’emunim] in scarlet…” (Lamentations 4:5). Amon  means hidden, as it says: “He was omen2This is expounded to mean that Mordekhai hid Esther from the emissaries of Aḥashverosh. Hadassa” (Esther 2:7). Amon means great, as it says: “Are you better than No Amon [which sits in the rivers]?” (Nahum 3:8), which we translate in Targum as: Are you better than the great city of Alexandria,3No (or No Amon) is the name of a city in Egypt. Targum identifies this city as Alexandria, and explains Amon to mean great. which is located among the rivers? Another matter, amon means artisan [uman]. The Torah is saying: ‘I was the tool of craft of the Holy One blessed be He.’ The way of the world is that when a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace he does not build it based on his own knowledge, but rather based on the knowledge of an artisan.4A professional builder. And the artisan does not build it based on his own knowledge, but rather, he has [plans on] sheets and tablets by which to ascertain how he should build its rooms, how he should build its doors. So too, the Holy One blessed be He looked in the Torah and created the world. The Torah says: “Bereshit God created” (Genesis 1:1), and reshit is nothing other than the Torah, as it says: “The Lord made me at the beginning of [reshit] His way” (Proverbs 8:22).5Be-reshit is interpreted as ‘by means of the Torah.’
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin began in the name of Rabbi Levi: “The power of His deeds, The account of Creation. He told to His people, to give them the inheritance of nations” (Psalms 111:6). What is the reason that the Holy One blessed be He revealed what was created on the first day and what was created on the second day? It is due to the idolaters, so they could not rebuke Israel and say to them: ‘You are a nation of robbers.’7By your conquest of the land of Israel from its original inhabitants. Israel responds to them and says to them: ‘And you, is it [your own land] not in your hands by robbery? Is it not so that: “Kaftorim, who emerged from Kaftor, destroyed them [the Avites], and settled in their place”? (Deuteronomy 2:23). The world and all its contents belong to the Holy One blessed be He. When He wished He gave it to you, and when He wished He took it from you and gave it to us.’ That is what is written: “[The power of His deeds He told to His people,] to give them the inheritance of nations…” – He told them [the history of] all the generations.8So that they should see clearly that peoples have often conquered other peoples.
“In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). “In the beginning, God created” – Rabbi Tanḥuma began: “For You are great and perform wonders” (Psalms 86:10). Rabbi Tanḥum said: A wineskin, if it has a hole as small as the point of a needle, all its air will escape from it.9When one inflates it to determine whether there are any holes. Yet a human is made with numerous cavities and orifices, but his air does not escape from him. Who can do so? It is “You, alone, are God” (Psalms 86:10). When were the angels created? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The angels [malakhim] were created on the second day. That is what is written: “He covers His upper chambers10The heavens. with water…”11This is what God did on the second day (Genesis 1:6–7). (Psalms 104:3), and it is written: “He makes the winds His messengers [malakhav]” (Psalms 104:4). Rabbi Ḥanina said: The angels were created on the fifth day. That is what is written: “Let birds fly [yeofef] over the earth…” (Genesis 1:20), and it is written [of the angels]: “And with two12The seraphim had six wings, using two of them for flight (Isaiah 6:2). it would fly [yeofef]” (Isaiah 6:2). Rabbi Lulyana bar Tavrin said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Both according to the opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina and according to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, everyone agrees that none were created on the first day, so people should not say: Mikhael was pulling at the south side of the heavens and Gabriel at its north side, while the Holy One blessed be He straightened it out in the middle. Rather, “I am the Lord, who made everything; who stretched out the heavens alone…by Myself [me’iti]” (Isaiah 44:24) – it [the last word] is written [as two],13Although the word is pronounced (keri) me’iti, in the biblical text it is written (ketiv) as two words, mi iti. “who is with Me [mi iti]?” Who was partner with Me in the creation of the world? Another matter, “for You are great and perform wonders” (Psalms 86:10) – the way of the world is that a flesh-and-blood king, when he is receives praise in the province,14For its magnificent buildings or for its proficient administration. the prominent leaders of the province receive praise along with him, as they bear the burden [of governing] with him. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so; rather, He alone created the world, He alone is lauded in the world, He alone is glorified in the world. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: “For You are great and perform wonders” – why? It is because “You, alone, are God” – You alone created the world.
“In the beginning, God created” – six items preceded the creation of the world; some of them were [actually] created, and some of them God contemplated creating, [though He did not actually do so]. The Torah and the Throne of Glory were created. Torah, from where is it derived? As it is stated: “The Lord made me15The speaker is Wisdom (the Torah) personified. at the beginning of His way” (Proverbs 8:22). The Throne of Glory, from where is it derived? “Your throne stands firm from earliest time, [You are from eternity]” (Psalms 93:2). The patriarchs, Israel, the Temple, and the name of the messianic king – God contemplated creating them [before the world, but did not]. The patriarchs, from where is it derived? “Like grapes in the wilderness [I found Israel, like a first fruit on the fig tree, at its beginning [bereshitah] I saw your fathers]” (Hosea 9:10). Israel, from where is it derived? “Remember Your congregation, that You acquired from old times” (Psalms 74:2). The Temple, from where is it derived? “Throne of glory, exalted from the beginning, [is the place of our Temple]” (Jeremiah 17:12). The name of the messianic king, from where is it derived? “May his name endure forever. His name is praised before the sun”16The Midrash expounds “before” to mean prior to. (Psalms 72:17). Rabbi Ahava ben Rabbi Ze’eira said: Repentance as well, as it is stated: “Before the birth of mountains” (Psalms 90:2), and at that same time, “You bring man down until he is crushed, [and then You say: Return, sons of man]” (Psalms 90:3). But I do not know which of them17The two things that were actually created before the world. was first – did the Torah precede the Throne of Glory, or did the Throne of Glory precede the Torah? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: The Torah preceded the Throne of Glory, as it is stated: “The Lord made me at the beginning of His way, [before His undertakings of old times]” (Proverbs 8:22) – before that in whose regard it is written: “Your throne stands firm from earliest time” (Psalms 93:2). Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: The contemplation about [creating] Israel preceded all other things. This is analogous to a king who married a noblewoman, but did not have a son from her. Once the king was found passing in the marketplace. He said: ‘Take this ink and inkwell for my son.’ Everyone was saying: ‘He has no son and yet he says: Take this ink and inkwell for my son?’ Then they said: ‘The king is a great astrologer, had it not been that he is destined to beget a son from her, he would not have said: Take this ink and inkwell for my son.’ So, too, had it not been that the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that after twenty-six generations Israel was destined to receive the Torah, He would not have written in the Torah: “Command the children of Israel”; “speak to the children of Israel.” Rabbi Banai said: The world and its contents were created only due to the merit of the Torah, as it is stated: “The Lord founded the earth with wisdom [beḥochma]”18Beḥochma could also be translated “for the sake of wisdom” – wisdom, throughout Proverbs, refers to the Torah. Similarly, the Midrash is interpreting Bereshit as “for the sake of Reshit” – God created the heavens and the earth for the sake of that which is called Reshit. (Proverbs 3:19). Rabbi Berekhya said: It was due to the merit of Moses, as it is stated: “He saw the first [reshit] for himself, [as there the portion of the lawgiver is hidden]” (Deuteronomy 33:21).19Moses, the lawgiver, is called Reshit, the first one. Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Matana: The world was created for the sake of three things: For the sake of ḥalla, for the sake of tithes, and for the sake of first fruits. What is the source? “In the beginning, [bereshit]20Or, for the sake of reshit. God created,” and reshit is nothing other than ḥalla, as it is stated: “The first of [reshit] your kneading basket” (Numbers 15:20). Reshit is nothing other than tithes, as it says: “The first [reshit] of your grain” (Deuteronomy 18:4). And reshit is nothing other than first fruits, as it is stated: “The choicest of [reshit] the first fruits of your land…” (Exodus 23:19).
Rav Huna began in the name of bar Kapara: “May they be silenced [te’alamna], those lying lips [that speak harsh words against the righteous one with arrogance and contempt]” (Psalms 31:19) – may they be bound up, may they become mute, may they be silenced.21The word te’alamna can have all these three meanings, as the Midrash goes on to show. May they become mute – as it says: “Who gives a mouth to a person, or who renders one mute [ilem] or deaf, or sighted or blind? Is it not I, the Lord?” (Exodus 4:11). And [may they be bound up,] as it says: “Behold, we were binding [me’alemim] sheaves in the field and behold, my sheaf arose” (Genesis 37:7). May they be silenced – that is its plain sense.22That is the literal translation of te’alamna. “That speak…against the Righteous One” (Psalms 31:19) – [this refers to] Him of eternal life.23The “righteous one” refers to God. “Harsh words [atak]” (Psalms 31:19) – matters that He concealed [shehe’etik] from His creations.24They speak out loud and expound on the secrets of Creation. “With arrogance” (Psalms 31:19) – this is an expression of bewilderment:25Can it be that someone would do such a thing out of arrogance? [Do they do this] in order to boast arrogantly: I am expounding the act of Creation? “And contempt” (Psalms 31:19) – this [too] is an expression of bewilderment: Is it in order to show contempt for My honor? As Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Anyone who attains honor through the degradation of another person has no portion in the World to Come; how much more so is this so regarding the honor of the Omnipresent. What is written following this? “How great is the goodness You have in store for those who fear You” (Psalms 31:20) – for those who fear You, but not for those who demean the [awesome] fear of You. They will not be included in: “How great is the goodness.” The way of the world is that when a flesh-and-blood king builds his palace in [a location that had been] a place of sewers, a place of refuse, and a malodorous place, anyone who comes and says: ‘This palace was built in a place of sewers, a place of refuse, and a malodorous place,’ is this not an insult? So, too, anyone who comes and says: ‘This world was created from emptiness and disorder,’ is this not an insult? This is a rhetorical question. Rav Huna said in the name of bar Kapara: Were the matter not written explicitly it would not have been possible to say it: “In the beginning, God created” (Genesis 1:1) – from what? “The earth was emptiness and disorder” (Genesis 1:2).
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon began: “He reveals the deep and the hidden [umsatrata]” (Daniel 2:22). “He reveals the deep” – this is Gehenna, as it is stated: “He does not know that the ghosts are there; [her guests are in the depths of the netherworld]” (Proverbs 9:18). And it says: “He deepened [he’emik] and widened” (Isaiah 30:33). “And the hidden [umsatrata]” – this is the Garden of Eden, as it is stated: “For protection and refuge [ulmistor]” (Isaiah 4:6). And it says: “Conceal them [tastirem] in the hideaway of Your presence” (Psalms 31:21). Another matter, “He reveals the deep and the hidden [umsatrata]” – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “Those who go deep from the Lord” (Isaiah 29:15). Umsatrata – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “To conceal [listor] counsel” (Isaiah 29:15). “He knows what is in the darkness” (Daniel 2:22) – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “Their actions are in the darkness” (Isaiah 29:15). “And the light rests with Him” (Daniel 2:22) – these are the actions of the righteous, as it is written: “But the path of the righteous is like a dawning light” (Proverbs 4:18), and it says: “Light is sown for the righteous…” (Psalms 97:11). Rabbi Abba Sarongaya said: “And the light rests with Him” – this is the messianic king, as it is stated: “Arise, shine, [for your light has come and the glory of the Lord has shone upon you]” (Isaiah 60:1), etc. in Pesikta. 26The Midrash refers us to Pesikta Rabati parashat Kumi ori, where the idea of light representing the Messiah is expounded further. (According to some, the word בפסיקתא is a scribal error and should be deleted.) Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: From the beginning of the creation of the world, “He reveals the deep and the hidden” (Daniel 2:22). [The verse states:] “In the beginning God created [the heavens]” (Genesis 1:1) – but it did not elaborate.27As to how they were created. And where did it elaborate? It was elsewhere: “Who spread the heavens like a curtain” (Isaiah 40:22). [It states further:] “And the earth” (Genesis 1:1) – but it did not elaborate. And where did it elaborate? It was elsewhere: “For He says to the snow: Become the earth” (Job 37:6); “when the dust consolidated into a mass…” (Job 38:38). [It states:] “God said: Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3) – but it did not elaborate. Where did it elaborate? “Enveloping with light as if with a cloak” (Psalms 104:2).
Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “The beginning of Your word is truth…” (Psalms 119:160) – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Right from the beginning of the creation of the world [it can be seen that] “the beginning of Your word is truth” – “in the beginning, God created.” “But My Lord God is truth” (Jeremiah 10:10),28This verse shows that God is the epitome of truth, and it is fitting that He should establish this truth right at the beginning of the Torah. This truth is the unity of God, as the Midrash goes on to explain. “All Your righteous laws are eternal” (Psalms 119:160) – as each and every edict that You decree upon Your creations, they accept the judgment upon themselves and receive it faithfully, and no person can come and say that two authorities created the world:29Other versions add: Or that two authorities gave the Torah. “God [Elohim] spoke [vaydaberu]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God spoke [vaydaber];”30Although the word Elohim is grammatically a plural form, the Torah constantly uses singular verbs with it, proving that God is indeed one.  “God [Elohim] said [vayomeru]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God said [vayomer]”; “In the beginning God created [bare’u]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God created [bara].”
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of Rabbi Levi: A builder requires six items: Water, dirt, wood, stones, reeds, and iron. If you say that he is wealthy and does not need reeds [to build with], he still needs to use them as a measuring rod, as it is stated: “A linen thread and a measuring rod” (Ezekiel 40:3). So, too, the Torah employed these six expressions of precedence: “Of old [kedem]…from earliest time [me’az], from ancient times [meolam]…from the beginning [merosh], from before [mikadmei]…” (Proverbs 8:22–23) – which counts as two,31Since mikadmei is a plural form. in the section of “the Lord made me” (Proverbs 8:22).
A certain philosopher once asked Rabban Gamliel, saying to him: ‘Your God is a great artist, however he found many excellent raw materials that helped him: Emptiness, disorder, darkness, wind, water, and depths.’ He said to him: ‘May the spirit of that man depart from him; regarding all of them, creation is written.’32God did not “find” these materials; He created them Himself. Emptiness and disorder, as it is stated: “Who makes peace and creates evil” (Isaiah 45:7). Darkness, “who forms light [and creates darkness]” (Isaiah 45:7); water, “Praise Him, heavens on heavens, and the water [above the heavens]” (Psalms 148:4). Why? “For He commanded and they were created” (Psalms 148:5). Wind, “For behold, He forms mountains and creates wind” (Amos 4:13); depths, “when there were no depths, I generated” (Proverbs 8:24).
Rabbi Yona said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Why was the world created with the letter beit?33It is the first letter of “bereshit – in the beginning.” It is because just as the beit is closed on all [three of] its sides but open in its front, so, you do not have permission to ask: What is below, what is above, what was before, and what is after,34Ḥagiga 2:1. One should not ponder what is above the firmament and what is below the earth, what was before Creation, and what will be after the end of the world. but only from the day when the world created and onward. Bar Kapara said: “For ask now of the early days that were before you, from the day [that God created man upon the earth]” (Deuteronomy 4:32) – from the day they were created, you may inquire, but you may not inquire what was before that. “From one end of the heavens to the other end” (Deuteronomy 4:32), you may inquire and investigate, but what is beyond that you may not investigate. Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi expounded regarding the act of Creation together with bar Kapara: Why was the world created with the letter beit? It is to inform you that there are two worlds,35The numerical value of beit is two. this world and the World to Come. Another matter, why with a beit? Because it alludes to an expression of blessing [berakha]. And why not with an alef? Because it alludes to an expression of curse [arira]. Another matter, why not with an alef? It is to avoid giving recourse to the heretics to say: How can the world endure, as it was created with an expression of curse? Rather, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Behold, I will create it with an expression of blessing, and there is hope that perhaps it will endure.’ Another matter, why with a beit? It is because just as the beit has two protrusions, one above it and one below and behind it, if one says to the beit: ‘Who created you?’ It points with its upper protrusion, saying: ‘That One who is above created me.’ ‘And what is His name?’ It points with its rear protrusion and says: ‘The Lord [Adonai] is His name.’36It points to the letter that is behind it, the alef, which is the first letter of Adonai, one of God’s names. Rabbi Elazar bar Ḥanina said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: For twenty-six generations37This is the number of generations that passed from Creation to the giving of the Torah. the alef complained before the throne of the Holy One blessed be He. It said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, I am the first of the letters, but You did not create Your world with me.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to it: ‘The world and all its contents were created only for the sake of the Torah, as it is stated: “The Lord founded the earth with wisdom…”38See earlier, section 4. (Proverbs 3:19). Tomorrow, I will be coming to give the Torah at Sinai, and I will open it at its beginning only with you, as it is stated: “I [anokhi] am the Lord your God”’ (Exodus 20:2). Rabbi Hoshaya says: Why is it called alef? It is because He consented concerning a thousand, as it is stated: “The word that He commanded for one thousand [elef] generations” (Psalms 105:8).39The Torah was originally supposed to be given to the thousandth [elef] generation (Bereishit Rabba 28:4). The first letter of that Torah was therefore given the name alef.
Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: [The alternative forms of the letters] Mem, nun, tzadi, peh, kaf,40These letters have different forms depending on whether they appear in the beginning or middle of a word, or at its end. the prophets said them, though it was a halakha transmitted to Moses at Sinai.41The existence of these alternative forms was transmitted to Moses, forgotten, and the prophets restored them. Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: What the prophets instituted.42The letters are not listed in the order they appear in the alphabet, and the list can be read as min tzofakh – from your prophets. It once happened that there was a stormy day and the Sages could not gather at the house of assembly,43The bet midrash, where the Torah was expounded. but there were some children there. They said: ‘Let us make our own house of assembly.’ They said: ‘What is the reason that it is written mem mem,44Why are there two forms with which to write mem, and so on. nun nun, tzadi tzadi, peh peh, kaf kaf ? It is for this reason: [To allude to the fact that the Torah was transmitted] from utterance [ma’amar] to utterance, from a faithful one [ne’eman] to a faithful one, from a righteous one [tzadik] to a righteous one, from mouth [peh] to mouth, from hand [kaf] to hand. From utterance to utterance – from the utterance of the Holy One blessed be He to the utterance of Moses; from a faithful one to a faithful one – from the Holy One blessed be He, who is called ‘God, faithful King’ – to Moses who is called faithful, as it is written: “In all My house he is faithful” (Numbers 12:7); from a righteous one to a righteous one – from the Holy One blessed be He, who is called righteous, as it is written: “Righteous is the Lord in all His ways” (Psalms 145:17), to Moses, who was called righteous, as it is written: “He performed the righteousness of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 33:21); from mouth to mouth – from the mouth of the Holy One blessed be He, to the mouth of Moses; from hand to hand – from the hand of the Holy One blessed be He, to the hand of Moses.’ They [the Sages] took note of them [the children], and [ultimately] great sages in Israel emerged from among them. Some say they were Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi Akiva. And they applied to them the verse: “Even a boy is recognized through his deeds, if his action is pure or upright” (Proverbs 20:11). anokhi of Rabbi Meir…>45These words are a scribal error and should be deleted (Matnot Kehuna). 
Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Akilas: To this One it is fitting to call God. The ordinary way of the world is that a flesh-and-blood king is praised in his province though he has not yet built any public baths in it and has not yet built private baths in it.46That is, without yet having provided anything for his subjects. First he proclaims his name and then presents his works. The Unique One of the world, however, first acted and then He was praised. Shimon ben Azai says: “Your humility has made me great” (II Samuel 22:36) – a flesh-and-blood [king] mentions his name first and then his title of praise: So-and-so Augustoli,47A title of great rank. So-and-so Pro titulo.48Meaning, whatever the title may be. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so; instead, after creating the needs of his world, only then does He mention His name: “In the beginning…created [bereshit bara]” and then “God [Elohim].”
Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: From where is it derived that a person should not say [when consecrating an offering]: ‘To the Lord, a burnt offering,’ ‘To the Lord, a meal offering,’ ‘To the Lord, a peace offering,’ but rather: ‘A burnt offering to the Lord,’ ‘A meal offering to the Lord,’ ‘A peace offering to the Lord’?49As a precaution, one should not say “to the Lord” before stating the offering in question, to avoid a situation where one might say “to the Lord” and fail to complete the statement. As the verse states: “An offering to the Lord” (Leviticus 1:2).50This is another explanation as to why the first verse of the Torah mentions God’s name only as the third word. A lesson can be derived from this by a fortiori: If, even of one who is about to consecrate something, the Torah says: Let the name of Heaven not be desecrated through the sacrifice; then those who curse, blaspheme, and engage in idol worship,51Engaging in actual desecration of God’s name. all the more so that they will be eradicated from the world. The Rabbis say: When a flesh-and-blood person builds a building, if the building process goes well, he makes it broad on top, but if not, he must make it broader on the bottom and narrower at the top.52If he sees that the foundations are not so sturdy, or the building materials are inferior, he must make the building narrower as it rises, for structural integrity. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so, but rather “[God created] the heavens”53With the definite article, alluding to an item that is already known. – those heavens that He had previously planned; “and the earth” – that earth that he had previously planned. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: Even those things, about which it is written: “For, behold, I am creating new heavens [and a new earth]” (Isaiah 65:17), [they] were already created since the six days of Creation. That is what is written: “For just as the new heavens and the new earth” (Isaiah 66:22); “[new heavens] and a new earth” is not written here, but rather, “the new [heavens and the new earth].”54The addition of the definite article indicates that it refers to earth and heavens that are previously known.
Rabbi Yishmael asked Rabbi Akiva, saying to him: ‘Because you studied under Naḥum of Gam Zo for twenty-two years, [who taught:] The words akh and rak are restrictive expressions, et and gam are inclusive expressions, [I ask you:] What is the meaning of the et that is written here [twice]?’55Et hashamayin ve’et haaretz. He said to him: ‘Had it been stated: “In the beginning God created heavens and earth [bereshit bara elohim shamayim vaaretz]” – we might have said that the heavens and the earth are deities.’56It could have been interpreted: ‘God, who is heavens and earth, created.’ The word et, however, indicates that what follows is the direct object of the verb. He [Rabbi Yishmael] said to him: “For it is not an empty matter for you [mikem]” (Deuteronomy 32:47) – if it is empty, it is because of you [mikem],57If you find something in the Torah that appears devoid of significance, it is because of your own ignorance. because you do not know how to expound, because you do not exert yourself in its regard. “As it [the Torah] is your life” (Deuteronomy 32:47) – when is it your life? It is when you exert yourself in its regard. Rather [the explanation is]: “et hashamayim” – to include the sun, the moon, and the constellations; “ve’et haaretz” – to include trees, vegetation, and the Garden of Eden. Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rav Huna: “Betzalel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, did everything that the Moses commanded him” is not stated, but rather, “everything that the Lord commanded Moses” (Exodus 38:22). Even matters that he [Betzalel] did not hear from his teacher, his perception corresponded to what was stated to Moses at Sinai. Rabbi Ḥonya said in the name of Rabbi: “The Torah of truth was in his mouth” (Malachi 2:6) – these are matters that he heard directly from his teacher.58The following line should be added here (Matnot Kehuna): “and falsehood was not found on his lips” (Malachi 2:6) – these are matters that he did not hear from his teacher. The Rabbis say: “For the Lord will be your hope [bekislekha]” (Proverbs 3:26) – even matters that you are a fool [kesil] in their regard, “He will protect your foot from being ensnared” (Proverbs 3:26).59If you make a concerted effort to understand, God will assist you, even regarding matters that you do not know about, so that you will not be caught up in any misstep.  Rabbi Dosai said: From promulgating [mistaken] teachings. Rabbi Abahu said: From transgressing. Rabbi Levi said: From malevolent spirits. Rabbi Avdimus said: If you gave charity from your purse [kis-lekha], the Holy One blessed be He will protect you from being charged unjust security taxes, fines, head taxes, and property taxes.
Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, Beit Shammai say: The heavens were created first and the earth was created thereafter. Beit Hillel says: The earth was created first and the heavens thereafter.60One verse puts the order as “God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1), but another has the opposite: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4). Which is the true chronological order? These cite a reason for their position and those cite a reason for their position. According to the opinion of Beit Shammai, who say that the heavens were created first and the earth thereafter, it is analogous to a king who had a throne made, and once that was made he had its footstool made. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: “The heavens are My throne and the earth is My footstool…” (Isaiah 66:1). According to the opinion of Beit Hillel, who say that the earth was created first and the heavens thereafter, it is analogous to a king who built a palace; first he built the lower sections and then he built the upper sections, so, “on the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4).61The earth first, then the heavens. Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: This verse, too, supports Beit Hillel: “You laid the foundations of earth in times past” (Psalms 102:26), and then, “the heavens are the work of Your hands” (Psalms 102:26). Rabbi Ḥanin said: From the same place where Scripture supports Beit Shammai,62"God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). from there, Beit Hillel refute them: “The earth was” (Genesis 1:2) – it already was. Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of the Sages: In terms of Creation, the heavens were first, but in terms of completion, the earth was first. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: I will say the source; in terms of Creation, the heavens were first, as it is stated: “In the beginning, God created [the heavens].” In terms of completion, the earth was first, as it is stated: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens.” Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: I am surprised how it is that the fathers of the world, Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, disagreed regarding the creation of the heavens and the earth. It is, rather, as I say, that both of them were created [at the same time,] like a stewpot and its lid, as it is stated: “[My hand also laid the foundation of the earth and My right hand measured the heavens]; I appointed them; they arise together” (Isaiah 48:13). Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon said: If it is in accordance with the opinion of my father, why is it that at times the earth is mentioned before the heavens and at times the heavens are mentioned before the earth? Rather, it teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Abraham is mentioned before Isaac and Jacob, but in one place it says: “I will remember My covenant with Jacob, [and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham]” (Leviticus 26:42). This teaches that the three of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Moses is mentioned before Aaron, but in one place it says: “It is Aaron and Moses” (Exodus 6:26). This teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Joshua is mentioned before Caleb, but in one place it says: “Except for Caleb son of Yefuneh the Kenizite and Joshua son of Nun” (Numbers 14:30, Numbers 32:12).63The citation in the Midrash is actually an amalgam of these two verses. This teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place turtledoves are mentioned before young pigeons, but in one place it says: “And a young pigeon or a turtledove as a sin offering” (Leviticus 12:6). This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place, honor of the father is mentioned before the mother, but in one place it says: “Each of you shall fear his mother and his father” (Leviticus 19:3). This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another. However, the Sages said: The father takes precedence over the mother, because both he [a son] and his mother are obligated to honor his father. In every place the creation of the heavens is mentioned before the earth, but in one place it says: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens.” This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another.

Section: Exodus_Rabbah
“These are the names of the children of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob; each came with his household” (Exodus 1:1). That is what is written: “He who spares his rod hates his son, and he who loves him seeks for him admonition” (Proverbs 13:24). The way of the world is that a person whom another tells him: ‘So-and-so struck your son,’ he would harass him. What is the meaning when the verse states: “He who spares his rod hates his son”? It is to teach you that anyone who withholds rebuke from his son, his son will ultimately set out on a path of depravity and he will hate him. As we find regarding Ishmael, who was beloved1Literally, he had longings for his father, which could explain his father’s love for him. by his father Abraham, who did not chasten him, and he set out on a path of depravity. He then hated him and expelled him from his home emptyhanded. What did Ishmael do? When he was fifteen years old, he began to bring an idol from the marketplace, and he played with it and worshipped it in the manner that he saw others doing.2Although he made it look like he was just playing with it and even mocking it, in fact his intention was to worship it. Immediately, “Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she bore to Abraham, playing [metzaḥek]” (Genesis 21:9), and metzaḥek means nothing other than idol worship, like you say: “They rose to carouse [letzaḥek]” (Exodus 32:6). 3This verse is written in the context of the sin of the Golden Calf. Immediately, “She said to Abraham: Expel this maidservant and her son” (Genesis 21:10), so that my son will not learn his ways. Immediately, “the matter was very troubling in the eyes of Abraham regarding his son” (Genesis 21:11), because he emerged to a path of depravity. “God said to Abraham: Let it not be troubling in your eyes about the lad…everything that Sarah says to you, heed her voice” (Genesis 21:12). From here you learn that Abraham was subordinate to Sarah in prophecy. Immediately, “Abraham rose early in the morning, and took bread and a skin of water…” (Genesis 21:14), teaching you that he hated Ishmael because he set out on a path of depravity, and sent him and his mother Hagar emptyhanded, and for that reason expelled him from his home. Is it conceivable that Abraham, in whose regard it is written: “Abram was very wealthy in livestock, in silver, and in gold” (Genesis 13:2), would send his wife and his son from his house emptyhanded, without garments and without sustenance? Rather, it is to teach you that once he [Ishmael] set out on the path of depravity, he [Abraham] paid no attention to him.4Consequently the verse states that he gave them bread and water, implying that he did not give them other means of support.  What ultimately became of him? When he banished him, he sat at the crossroads and would rob people, as it is stated: “He will be a wild man” (Genesis 16:12). Similarly, “Isaac loved Esau” (Genesis 25:28); therefore he set out on a path of depravity, because he did not chasten him, as we learned: The wicked Esau violated five transgressions on that day. He consorted with a betrothed young woman, killed a person, denied the revival of the dead, denied the principle [of belief in God], and scorned the birthright. In addition, he desired the death of his father and sought to kill his brother, as it is stated: “Let the days of mourning for my father approach and I will kill Jacob my brother” (Genesis 27:41), and he caused Jacob to flee from his fathers. And he [Esau] too went to Ishmael to learn from him the path of depravity and to add to his wives, as it is stated; “Esau went to Ishmael, [and took Maḥalat the daughter of Ishmael…in addition to his wives, as his wife]” (Genesis 28:9). Similarly, David did not chastise Avshalom and did not chasten him, [and Avshalom] set out on the path of depravity. He sought to kill his father, he lay with his [father’s] concubines, and forced him to walk barefoot, weeping; and thousands and tens of thousands from Israel fell. In addition, he caused him endless hardships, as it is written: “A psalm by David when he fled from Avshalom, etc.” (Psalms 3:1). What is written afterward? “Lord, how numerous are my tormentors, etc.” (Psalms 3:2). The path of depravity5A wayward child in a person’s household is worse than the war of Gog and Magog, as regarding Gog and Magog it is written: “Why do nations rage and peoples meditate in vain?” (Psalms 2:1), and there it is written: “Lord, how numerous are my tormentors.” David acted similarly with Adoniya, as he did not chasten him with chastisement and he did not scold him; therefore, he set out on the path of depravity, as it is written: “His father never distressed him, [saying: Why did you do so? …and she bore him after Avshalom]” (I Kings 1:6). But wasn’t Avshalom the son of Maakha, and Adoniyahu the son of Ḥaggit? What is: “And she bore him after Avshalom”? Rather, because [Avshalom] set out on the path of depravity because his father did not chasten him, and in Adoniyahu’s regard, it is written: “His father never distressed him,” he, too, set out on the path to depravity. Therefore, it is written: “And she bore him after Avshalom.”  “And he who loves him seeks for him admonition” (Proverbs 13:24); this is the Holy One blessed be He. It is because he loves Israel, as it is written: “I have loved you, said the Lord” (Malachi 1:2) that he promotes them through suffering. You find three excellent gifts that the Holy One blessed be He gave to Israel, and he gave them all to them by means of suffering: The Torah, the Land of Israel, and life in the World to Come. The Torah, as it is written: “Happy is the man whom You afflict, Lord, whom You teach from Your Torah” (Psalms 94:12). The Land of Israel, as it is written: “For you know in your heart [that as a man rebukes his son, so the Lord your God rebukes you]” (Deuteronomy 8:5); what is written after it: “For the Lord your God will bring you [to a good land]” (Deuteronomy 8:7). The World to Come, as it is written: “For the mitzva is a lamp, the Torah is light, [and the reproofs of instruction are the way of life]”6This indicates that the way to merit everlasting life is through reproof, which involves suffering.  (Proverbs 6:23). Anyone who chastises his son, the son adds love for his father and he honors him, as it is stated: “Admonish your son, and he will give you rest [and provide delights to your soul]” (Proverbs 29:17), and it is stated: “Admonish your son, as there is hope” (Proverbs 19:18). And he adds love for him, as it is stated: “And he who loves him seeks for him admonition” – because he sought for him admonition, therefore he loves him. You find that Abraham chastised his son Isaac, taught him Torah, and guided him in his path, as it is written in Abraham’s regard: “Because Abraham heeded My voice, [and kept My commission, My commandments, My statutes, and My laws]” (Genesis 26:5), and it is written: “And this is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son: [Abraham begot Isaac]” (Genesis 25:19), to teach you that he was similar to his father in every sense; in beauty, wisdom, wealth, and good deeds. Know [that Isaac internalized Abraham’s lessons and accepted his authority], for he was thirty-seven years old when his father bound him, and it is written: “And Abraham was old, advanced in years” (Genesis 24:1), and he bound him and tied him, and [Isaac] did not prevent [him from doing so]. Therefore, “Abraham gave all that was his to Isaac” (Genesis 25:5); that is: “And he who loves him seeks for him admonition.” Similarly, Isaac would seek admonition for Jacob, as he taught him Torah and chastised him in his study hall, as it is stated: “Jacob was a simple man, [a dweller in tents]” (Genesis 25:27). He learned what his father taught him and then he took his leave from his father and secluded himself in the house of Ever to study Torah. Therefore, he merited blessing and inherited the land, as it is stated: “Jacob settled in the land of his father's residence, in the land of Canaan” (Genesis 37:1). Jacob our patriarch, too, chastised his sons, chastened them, and taught them his ways, until ultimately, there were none among them who was defective, as it is written: “These are the names of the children of Israel who came to Egypt [with Jacob]” (Exodus 1:1); the verse likened them all to Jacob, as they were all righteous like he was. That is: “And he who loves him seeks for him admonition.”
Another interpretation [of the phrase] “these [ve’eleh] are the names” – Rabbi Abbahu says: Anywhere that eleh is stated, it negates what preceded it; ve’eleh, it adds praise to what preceded it. “This is [eleh] the legacy of the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 2:4) negates “void and darkness” (Genesis 1:2). “These are [ve’eleh] the names” adds praise to the seventy people cited above; that they were all righteous.
These are the names [shemot] of the children of Israel who came to Egypt; Jacob and his sons, every man came with his household.7This is a paraphrase of Exodus 1:1 and Genesis 46:8.  Israel is equated to the host of the heavens. Shemot is stated here and shemot is stated regarding the stars, as it is stated: “He sets a number for the stars and calls them all by name” (Psalms 147:4). The Holy One blessed be He, too, when they descended to Egypt, counted their numbers, how many they were. Because they are analogized to stars, He called them all by name; that is what is written: “These are the names of the children of Israel.”
“Who came to Egypt,”8A more literal translation of the verse is “who were coming to Egypt.”  – was it today that they came? Hadn’t many years passed since they came to Egypt? Rather, as long as Joseph was alive, they did not have the burden of Egypt. Joseph died, and they placed the burden upon them. Therefore, “who came” is written, as though they entered Egypt on that day.  “With Jacob,” all these were under the patronage of Jacob, who amassed mitzvot and good deeds and was privileged to produce twelve tribes. “Each came with his household.”9Some commentaries suggest that the midrash should include here the following passage, which appears in Tanḥuma (Shemot 3): “Rabbi Huna said: This is to teach that he did not descend to Egypt until he arranged wives for Ḥetzron and Ḥamul, who were two years old and one year old respectively; “each came with his household.” See Etz Yosef. 
“These are the names of the children of Israel,” they are all mentioned here in the sense of the redemption of Israel. Reuben, as it is stated: “I have seen the affliction of his people” (Exodus 3:7).10When Leah named her son Reuben, she said: “because the Lord has seen my affliction” (Genesis 29:32). The midrash is stating that his name also refers to the redemption of the children of Israel, as demonstrated by this verse (Midrash HaMevoar). This is true in a similar vain for all of the names listed below.  Simeon, in the sense of: “God heard their groan” (Exodus 2:24).11Leah named Simeon saying: “because the Lord has heard that I am hated” (Genesis 29:33). Levi, in the sense that the Holy One blessed be He joined [them] in their troubles “from inside the bush” (Exodus 3:2),12Leah named Levi saying: “now this time my husband will be joined to me” (Genesis 29:34). The fact that God spoke to Moses from inside a thorn bush indicated that He was with them in their pain.  to fulfill what is stated: “I am with him in times of trouble” (Psalms 91:15). Judah, because they thanked the Holy One blessed be He.13When Leah named Judah, she said “this time I will thank the Lord” (Genesis 29:35).  Issachar, because the Holy One blessed be He paid their wages [sakhar] for their labor; the loot of Egypt and the loot at the sea, to fulfill what is written: “Afterward they will emerge with great wealth” (Genesis 15:14). Zebulun, because the Holy One blessed be He rested His Divine Presence in their midst, as it is stated: “They shall make Me a sanctuary and I will dwell among them” (Exodus 25:8). Zebulun is nothing other than the Temple, as it is stated: “I have built You an abode [beit zevul], a place for Your dwelling forever” (I Kings 8:13). Benjamin, in the sense of: “Your right hand, Lord, is glorious in power” (Exodus 15:6). Dan, in the sense of: “And also that nation that they shall serve, I will judge [dan]” (Genesis 15:14). Naftali after the Torah and mitzvot that the Holy One blessed be He had given them, regarding which it is written: “And sweeter than honey and the juices [nofet] of ripe fruit” (Psalms 19:11). Gad, after the manna that the Holy One blessed be He fed them, which was “like the coriander [gad] seed” (Exodus 16:31). Asher, because everyone who heard of their redemption and prominence would praise them, as it is written: “All the nations will praise you [ve’ishru], as you will be a desired land, said the Lord of hosts” (Malachi 3:12). Joseph, because the Holy One blessed be He is destined to additionally [lehosif] redeem Israel from the evil empire,14Rome just as He redeemed them from Egypt, as it is written: “It shall be on that day that the Lord will once again [yosif] set His hand a second time [to acquire the remnant of His people…as there was for Israel on the day of its ascent from the land of Egypt]” (Isaiah 11:11, 16), and the entire matter [written there].
This is what Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin says in the name of Rabbi Levi: Why are the names of the tribes not identical everywhere, but rather, at times this one precedes that one, and at times, that one precedes this one? It is so they would not say: The children of the wives are first and the children of the maidservants last, to teach you that these were not greater than those. Alternatively, why do these precede those? It is because they are the ceiling of the world. One who installs a ceiling properly places the thickness of this ceiling beam alongside one that is not its equal; therefore, this one precedes that one. From where is it derived that they are the ceiling [tikra] of the world? It is as Isaiah says: “Heed Me, Jacob and Israel, whom I called [mekora’i]” (Isaiah 48:12).
“All the people who emerged from the loins of Jacob were seventy souls, and Joseph was in Egypt” (Exodus 1:5). “All the people who emerged from the loins of Jacob,” including Joseph who was in Egypt, were seventy. Alternatively, “and Joseph was in Egypt” [teaches that] even though Joseph ascended to royalty, he did not relate to his brothers and his father’s household with haughtiness. Just as he was insignificant in his [own] eyes initially when he was a slave in Egypt, so too, he was insignificant in his [own] eyes after he was king.
“Joseph died along with all his brothers and that entire generation” (Exodus 1:6). Teaching that as long as one of those who descended to Egypt was alive, the Egyptians did not enslave Israel.  “The children of Israel were fruitful, propagated, increased, and grew exceedingly, and the land filled with them” (Exodus 1:7). “The children of Israel were fruitful, propagated…” Even though Joseph and his brothers died, their God did not die, but rather: “The children of Israel were fruitful, propagated…”15It was His Providence that ensured the continuity of the children of Israel. Alternatively, each and every one gave birth to six in each womb, as it is stated: “The children of Israel were fruitful, propagated, [increased, and grew exceedingly, and the land filled with them.]” Some say: Twelve, as it is written: “Were fruitful” – two, “propagated” – two, “increased” – two, “grew” – two, “exceedingly [bimod meod ]” – two, “and the land filled with them” – two, for a total of twelve.16All the verbs are plural, the double language bimod meod indicates another two, and the land filled with them indicates another two. The first opinion derives one from each of those words and phrases.  “Grew [vayishretzu],” some say: “Six17According to many commentaries, the correct wording here is “sixty.”  in each womb,” and do not wonder, as a scorpion, which is one of the swarming creatures [sheratzim], gives birth to sixty.18Some versions of the Hebrew text have “seventy,” but others have “sixty,” which is the version preferred by most commentaries.  Rabbi Natan says: “And the land was filled with them,” like fields of reeds.  “A new king arose over Egypt who did not know Joseph” (Exodus 1:8). “A new king arose.” Once the Egyptians saw this, they issued new decrees against them; that is what is written: “A new king arose.” Rav and Shmuel, one says: [He was] actually new, and one says: He [was not new, but] issued new decrees, as he brought new decrees and calamities upon them. The reason of the one who says actually new, is that “new” is written. The reason of the one who says he issued new decrees, is that “he died” and “he reigned” is not written. “Who did not know Joseph” – according to the opinion of the one who says new, it works out well. But according to the one who says that he issued new decrees, how does he interpret it? It is because he was like one who did not know Joseph at all. The Rabbis say: Why did it call him “a new king”? Was it not Pharaoh himself? Rather, the Egyptians said to Pharaoh: ‘Come let us confront this nation.’ He said to them: ‘You are fools. Until now we have been eating from what is theirs, how can we confront them? Were it not for Joseph we would not be alive.’ Because he did not heed them, they dethroned him for three months, until he said to them: ‘Anything that you want, I am with you.’ Then they restored him; therefore it is written: “A new king arose.” The Rabbis introduced [this matter] with this verse: “They have betrayed the Lord, for they have begotten foreign children; now a month will devour them with their portions” (Hosea 5:7), teaching that when Joseph died, they abrogated the covenant of circumcision. They said: ‘Let us be like the Egyptians.’ From here you derive that Moses circumcised them upon their exodus from Egypt. Once they did this, the Holy One blessed be He transformed the love that the Egyptians felt for them into hatred, as it is stated: “He changed their hearts to hate His people, to harass His servants” (Psalms 105:25). This is the meaning of what is written: “Now a month [ḥodesh] will devour them with their portions” – the new [ḥadash] king, who issued new decrees against them. “Who did not know Joseph.” Was he unfamiliar with Joseph? Rabbi Avin said: This is analogous to one who stoned one beloved by the king. The king said: ‘Behead him, because tomorrow he will do the same to me.’ That is why the verse wrote [this] about him, as though to say: Today [he acts as one], “who did not know Joseph,” tomorrow he is destined to say: “I do not know the Lord” (Exodus 5:2). 
“He said to his people: Behold, the nation of the children of Israel is more numerous and mighty than us” (Exodus 1:9). “He said to his people” – he began with the counsel first; therefore, he was punished first. He began with the counsel first, as it is written: “He said to his people.” He was punished first, as it is written: “Upon you, upon your people, and upon all your servants, [the frogs will rise]” (Exodus 7:29).  “Let us be shrewd with it, lest it increase, and it shall be that if a war will occur, it too will join our enemies and wage war against us and it will ascend from the land” (Exodus 1:10). “Let us be shrewd with it.” “With them” is not stated, but rather, “with it.” Rabbi Ḥama son of Rabbi Ḥanina said: He said: ‘Come let us be shrewd with the God of these. Shall we sentence them with the sword? It is already written: “And with His sword all flesh” (Isaiah 66:16). We will sentence them only with water, as the Holy One blessed be He took an oath that He will not bring a flood to the world, as it is stated: “As I took an oath that the waters of Noah would no longer pass over the earth” (Isaiah 54:9).’ But they did not know that He will not bring it over the entire world, but He will bring it on one nation. And He will not bring it [even] upon them, but they will come and fall into it, as it is stated: “They will be hurled [yagiruhu] to the sword [ḥarev]; they will be prey for the foxes [shualim]” (Psalms 63:11).19The midrash interprets this: He will entice [yegareh] them with dry land [ḥorev], into the waters of the sea [sha’al yam].  “As it was in the matter that they conspired [against them]” (Exodus 18:11) – in the pot in which they cooked, they were cooked.20They sought to drown the Jewish boys in the river; they were drowned in the Red Sea. Rabbi Ḥiyya said that Rabbi Simon said: There were three [involved] in that counsel: Bilam, Job, and Yitro. Bilam, who advised [Pharaoh to persecute Israel], was killed. Job, who was silent, was punished with suffering. Yitro, who fled, his descendants were privileged to sit in the Chamber of Hewn Stone, as it is stated: “The families of scribes who dwelled at Yabetz: The Tiratites, the Shime’atites, the Sukatites. These are the Kenites that came from Hamat, the father of the house of Rekhav” (I Chronicles 2:55). And it is written: “The children of the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, went up from the city of the date palms with the children of Judah” (Judges 1:16).  “…and it will ascend from the land” (Exodus 1:10). It does not say: And we will ascend, but rather: “It will ascend.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: It is like a person who curses himself but ascribes his curse to another.21Although Pharaoh’s stated concern was that the Israelites would leave Egypt, his real concern was that they would overcome the Egyptians and banish them from Egypt. Alternatively, “and it will ascend from the land,” any time that Israel reaches the ultimate depths, they ascend; see what is written: “And it will ascend from the land.” David said: “Our soul is bent to the dust; our belly cleaves to the earth.” (Psalms 44:26). At that moment: “Rise up, be our savior; redeem us for the sake of Your kindness” (Psalms 44:27).
They imposed upon them taskmasters in order to afflict them with their burdens, and they built storage cities for Pharaoh, Pitom and Raamses (Exodus 1:11). “They imposed upon him [alav],”22Although the verse is generally translated “they imposed upon them taskmasters in order to afflict them with their burdens,” the object of the sentence is actually written in singular, such that a more literal translation is “they imposed upon it/him taskmasters to afflict it/him with their burdens.”  – “upon them [aleihem]” is not stated, but rather “upon him.” The school of Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Shimon taught: It teaches that they brought a brick mold and they hung it on the neck of Pharaoh. If any individual from Israel would say: ‘I am a delicate person,’ they would say to him: ‘Are you more delicate than Pharaoh?’ “Taskmasters [sarei missim],” something upon which bricks are placed [mesim].“In order to afflict him with their burdens” – in order to afflict Pharaoh with the burdens of the Jewish people.23The brick mold was placed around Pharaoh’s neck in order to make it seem that he too was participating in the building efforts, so that the Israelites would willingly agree to begin working.  “They built storage cities [miskenot] for Pharaoh.” Rav and Shmuel, one said: That endanger [mesakenot] their owners. And one said: That impoverish [memaskenot] their owners, as anyone who engages in construction become poor. The Rabbis say: Storehouses, as it says: “Go and approach that steward” (Isaiah 22:15).24The reference is to Shevna in whose hands the keys to the storehouses were entrusted. See Isaiah 22:22. “Pitom and Raamses,” Rav and Shmuel, one says: Pitom was its name, and why was it called Raamses? It is because [the buildings] would collapse [mitrossess] one by one. And one says: Raamses was its name, and why was it called Pitom? It is because the opening of the abyss [pi tehom] would swallow [the buildings] one by one.
“But the more they would afflict it, the more it would increase and the more it would proliferate; they were disgusted by the children of Israel” (Exodus 1:12). “But the more they would afflict it, the more it would increase and the more it would proliferate.” “The more they increased and the more they proliferated is not stated, but rather, “it would increase and it would proliferate.” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: The Divine Spirit is heralding to them: Each of them “will increase and will proliferate.”25It is written in future tense and in the singular and not in past tense plural. “They were disgusted [vayakutzu] by the children of Israel,” teaching that Israel was like thorns [kotzim] in their eyes. “The Egyptians enslaved the children of Israel ruthlessly [befarekh]” (Exodus 1:13). Rabbi Elazar said: With gentle persuasion [befeh rakh]. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman says: With crushing cruelty [bifrikha]. This is what they did to each person of Israel: They imposed a decree upon them that each and every day they should produce the equivalent of the number of bricks that they produced on the first day.  “They embittered their lives with hard labor, with mortar and with bricks, and with all kinds of work in the fields; all the work with which they worked them ruthlessly” (Exodus 1:14).  “They embittered their lives with hard labor, etc.” – initially, “with mortar and with bricks,” and later “with all kinds of work in the field,” and ultimately, “all the work.” What is: “All the work with which they worked them ruthlessly”? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said that Rabbi Yonatan [said]: It teaches that they would exchange the labor of men for women and the labor of women for men. Rabbi Avya said: Rabbi Elazar concedes that this is [work imposed] with crushing cruelty.26Although Rabbi Elazar interpreted the word befarekh in verse 13 to mean with gentle persuasion, he concedes that the word befarekh at the end of verse 14 means with crushing cruelty. Thus, the beginning of the servitude was conducted with gentle persuasion, but eventually it was with crushing cruelty. 
Pharaoh issued four decrees against them. Initially, he decreed and commanded the taskmasters to pressure them so that they would produce their quota and they would not sleep at home. He thought to diminish their procreation. He said: If they do not sleep at home they will not have children. The taskmasters said to them: ‘If you go to sleep in your homes, by the time we send to gather you in the morning, an hour or two of the day will have passed, and you will not meet your quota,’ as it is stated: “The taskmasters pressured them saying, [fulfill your work, your daily task]” (Exodus 5:13). They would sleep on the ground. God said to them [the Egyptians]: ‘I said to their forefather Abraham that I will multiply his descendants like the stars, as it is stated: “For I will bless you, and I will multiply, etc.” (Genesis 22:17), and you are outsmarting them so they will not multiply? We will see whose matter prevails, Mine or yours.’ Immediately, “but the more they would afflict them, the more they would increase…” (Exodus 1:12). Rabbi Akiva expounded: On account of the righteous women who were in that generation, Israel was redeemed from Egypt. What did they do? When they would go to draw water, the Holy One blessed be He would arrange for them small fish in their jugs, and they would draw half water and half fish. They would take it to their husbands and would place two pots on the fire [veshoftot], one with hot water and one with fish. They would feed them, bathe them, anoint them with oil, and give them to drink, and they would consort with them between the pots [shefatayim], as it is stated: “Now you may lie within the sheepfolds [shefatayim], wings of the dove covered with silver” (Psalms 68:14). In reward for having lain between the pots, Israel merited the loot of Egypt, as it is stated: “wings of the dove covered with silver.” When they would conceive, they would come to their homes. When the time of their birth arrived, they would go and give birth in the fields, under apple trees, as it is stated: “Under the apple tree I roused you [there your mother was in childbirth]” (Song of Songs 8:5). The Holy One blessed be He would send an angel from the heavens above who would clean them and tend to them like the beast that tends to its young, as it is stated: “As for your birth, on the day you were born [your umbilical cord was not cut, and you were not washed in water for cleansing…and you were not swaddled]” (Ezekiel 16:4).27In this chapter, addressing the exile in Egypt, there was no midwife to perform these tasks; rather, God saw to them, as it is written: “I bathed you in water, rinsed your blood from upon you, and anointed you with oil. I dressed you in embroidered garments…I wrapped you, etc. (Ezekiel 16:9–10). They would take two round vessels of earth, one containing oil and one containing honey, as it is stated: “He suckled them honey from a boulder [and oil from a flinty rock]” (Deuteronomy 32:13). Once the Egyptians became aware of them [the babies], they sought to kill them. A miracle was performed for them and they were enveloped in the ground. They [the Egyptians] brought oxen and they plowed [the land] above them, as it is stated: “Upon my back plowers plowed” (Psalms 129:3). After [the Egyptians] would leave, they would sprout and emerge like the grass of the field, as it is stated: “I caused you to increase like the growth of the field” (Ezekiel 16:7). Once they grew, they would come in herds [adarim] to their homes, as it is stated: “You came to have great beauty [ba’adi adayim]” (ibid.) – do not read it ba’adi adayim but rather be’edrei adarim. When the Holy One blessed be He revealed Himself on the sea, they recognized Him first, as it is stated: “This is my God and I will glorify Him” (Exodus 15:2). 28This is because they remembered Him from the miracles He performed for them in Egypt.
“The king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name of one was Shifra and the name of the other was Pu’a” (Exodus 1:15). When he saw that they were procreating, he issued a decree against the males 29This is Pharaoh’s second decree. – that is what is written: “The king of Egypt said to the midwives….” Who were the midwives? Rav said: A daughter-in-law and her mother-in-law, Yokheved and Elisheva daughter of Aminadav. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman says: A woman and her daughter, Yokheved and Miriam. And Miriam was no more than five years old, as Aaron was three years older than Moses. Our Rabbis, of blessed memory, said: She would go with her mother Yokheved and assist her, and she was very quick. While the child is still young, his [character] is recognizable. That is what Solomon said: “Even a lad is recognized through his deeds” (Proverbs 20:11). “…the name of one was Shifra [and the name of the other was Pu’a],” because she would attend to [meshaperet] the baby when he would emerge covered in blood; “Pu’a,” because she would express [nofa’at] wine into the babies after her mother [had attended to them]. Alternatively, Shifra, because Israel procreated [sheparu veravu] in her day; Pu’a, who would revive [mapia] the baby when they would say it was dead. Alternatively, Shifra, because she made her actions pleasing [shipera] before God; Pu’a, because she caused Israel to appear [hofia] before God. Alternatively, Pu’a, because she was impudent [hofia panim] to Pharaoh and had her nose in the air toward him, and she said to him: ‘Woe unto that man when God will come and punish him.’ He became filled with fury and sought to kill her. Shifra, because she eased [meshaperet] the words of her daughter and placated him toward her. She said to him: ‘Are you paying attention to her? She is a child and knows nothing.’ Rabbi Ḥanina bar Rav Yitzḥak said: Shifra, because she preserved Israel for God, and it was for their sake that the heavens were created, regarding which it is written: “By his wind the heavens are calm [shifra]” (Job 26:13). Pu’a, because she was impudent [hofia panim] toward her father. Amram was the head of the Sanhedrin at that time. Once Pharaoh issued his decree and said: “Every son that is born you shall cast him into the Nile” (Exodus 1:22), Amram said: ‘Isn’t Israel begetting children for naught?’ Immediately, he separated from Yokheved and abstained from sexual relations. He divorced his wife when she was three months pregnant. All Israel arose and divorced their wives. His daughter said to him: ‘Your decree is harsher than Pharaoh’s, as Pharaoh decreed only against the males, and you, against the males and the females. Pharaoh is wicked and it is uncertain whether his decree will be fulfilled or whether it will not be fulfilled. However, you are righteous and your decree will be fulfilled.’ He arose and remarried his wife. All Israel arose and remarried their wives. That is Pu’a, who was impudent toward her father.
He said: When you deliver the Hebrew women and you look upon the birthstool [ovnayim], if it is a son you shall kill him but if it is a daughter she shall live (Exodus 1:16). “He said: When you deliver the Hebrew women…” Why did he command to kill them by means of the midwives? It was so the Holy One blessed be He would not prosecute him, but would punish them. “And you look upon the ovnayim,” [this is] the place through which the baby passes [as it emerges]. Alternatively, ovnayim, Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He makes a woman’s limbs hard as stones [avanim] when she is sitting on the birthstool in childbirth, as were it not so, she would die. Rabbi Pinḥas the ḥaver says in the name of Rabbi Yona, this supports Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: Ovnayim means nothing other than a block, which is a hard object, as it is written: “I went down to the potter’s house, and behold, he was at work on the wheel [ovnayim]” (Jeremiah 18:3).30This is the surface on which the potter produces his vessel.. Rabbi Ḥanin said: He provided them a clear sign: Just as the potter has one thigh here and one thigh there and the block in the middle, so too, a woman giving birth has one thigh here and one thigh there and the newborn is in the middle. Some say: When she crouches to deliver, her thighs grow cold as stones. “If it is a son, you shall kill him.” He said to them, if it is male, kill him, and if it is female, do not kill her; rather, if she lives, she lives, and if she dies, she dies. They said to him: How will we know if it is male or if it is female? Rabbi Ḥanina said: He provided them a clear sign. If it is face down, know that he is male, as he is looking, in his mother, at the earth from which he was created. If it is face up, she is a female, as she is looking at her source, the rib, as it is stated: “He took one of his ribs” (Genesis 2:21). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Wicked one, whoever gave this counsel is a fool. You should have killed the females. If there are no females from where will the males marry women? One woman cannot take two men, but one man can take ten women, or one hundred.’ That is: “The princes of Tzoan are but fools” (Isaiah 19:11); it is they who gave him this counsel.
The midwives feared God and did not do as the king of Egypt had spoken to them, and they kept the boys alive” (Exodus 1:17). “The midwives feared God.” About them it is stated: “A God-fearing woman, she will be praised” (Proverbs 31:30). “And did not do as the king of Egypt had spoken to them [aleihen].” Lahen is not written, but rather aleihen.31A formulation used elsewhere in the Bible in the sense of sexual relations, e.g., Genesis 29:23. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina says: It teaches that he demanded that they have relations with him, but they did not accept his proposition. “They kept the boys alive.” Since they “did not do as the king of Egypt had spoken to them,” do we not know that they kept the boys alive? Why did the verse need to state: “They kept the boys alive”? There is praise within praise. Not only did they not fulfill his command, but they went beyond that and performed good deeds for their benefit. Some of them were poor women, and the midwives would go and collect water and food from the homes of wealthy women and would come and give it to the poor women, thereby sustaining their sons. That is what is written: “They kept the boys alive.” Alternatively, “they kept the boys alive” – some had a condition that would result in their emerging crippled, blind, deformed, or needing to have a limb amputated in order to emerge safely. What would they do? They would stand in prayer and say before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘You know that we did not fulfill Pharaoh’s command. It is Your words that we seek to fulfill. Lord of the universe, may this child emerge in peace, so Israel will not find a pretext to slander us, saying: Look, they emerged deformed because they sought to kill them.’ Immediately, the Holy One blessed be He would heed their voice, and [the babies] would emerge intact. Rabbi Levi said: You stated the less severe scenarios; state the severe scenarios. Some of them had a condition that would cause them to die as they emerged, or endanger their mother so she would die after they emerged. They would stand in prayer and say to the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, suspend their sentence now and give them life, so that Israel will not say: They killed them.’ The Holy One blessed be He would fulfill their prayer. Therefore, “they kept the boys alive [vateḥayena et hayeladim]” – vateḥayena, these are the mothers, hayeladim, these are the actual children. Alternatively, “the midwives feared,” – they adorned themselves with the action of their ancestor, that is Abraham. Just as the Holy One blessed be He attests in his regard: “For now I know that you are God-fearing” (Genesis 22:12), they said: ‘Abraham our patriarch, of blessed memory, opened an inn and would feed all the passersby, uncircumcised people, and we, not only do we not have enough to feed them, but to kill them? We will keep them alive.’ When Pharaoh saw that they did not implement his decree, he sent and called for them; that is what is written: “The king of Egypt called for the midwives [and said to them: Why have you done this thing, and have kept the boys alive?”] (Exodus 1:18).
The midwives said to Pharaoh: Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women, as they are vigorous; before the midwife comes to them, they have delivered (Exodus 1:19). “As they are vigorous [ḥayot].” If you say that they are midwives,32One of the interpretations of the Hebrew word ḥaya is midwife. does one midwife not require another midwife to assist her? Rather, this is what they said to him: This nation is analogized to the beasts of the field, which do not require midwives. Judah is likened to a lion, as it is written: “Judah is a lion’s cub (Genesis 49:9); Dan, “Dan will be a serpent [on the road]” (Genesis 49:17); Naftali, “a hind let loose” (Genesis 49:21); Issachar is “a strong-boned donkey” (Genesis 49:14); Joseph, “a firstborn bull” (Deuteronomy 33:17); Benjamin is “a wolf that claws” (Genesis 49:27). Regarding the rest it is written: “How your mother was a lioness, she lay among lions” (Ezekiel 19:2). God was good to the midwives; the people increased and they grew very mighty (Exodus 1:20). “God was good to the midwives.” What was this good? The king of Egypt accepted their explanations and did not harm them. Alternatively, “God was good,” Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya ben Rabbi Abba: That is what is written: “He said to man: Behold, fear of the Lord, that is wisdom” (Job 28:28). What is the reward for fear? It is Torah. Because Yokheved feared the Holy One blessed be He, He produced Moses, of whom it is written: “That he was good” (Exodus 2:2), from her. And the Torah, that is called “a good acquisition” (Proverbs 4:2), was given through him, and it is called after his name, as it is stated: “Remember the Torah of Moses My servant” (Malachi 3:22). As for Miriam, Betzalel, who was filled with wisdom, as it is written: “I filled him with the spirit of God, [with wisdom]” (Exodus 31:3), emerged from her. And he crafted an ark for the Torah, which is called “good” – that is: “God was good to the midwives.” “The people increased,” to fulfill what is stated: “Who is it who says and it is realized, if the Lord did not command it?” (Lamentations 3:37). If Pharaoh commanded to kill all the males, to what avail was his decree when God did not command it? Rather: “The people increased and they grew very mighty.”
“It was because the midwives feared God, He made houses for them” (Exodus 1:21).  “It was because the midwives feared [God, He made houses for them].” Rav and Levi, one said: Priestly houses and Levite houses, and one said: Royal houses. Priestly and Levite houses from Moses and Aaron, royal houses from Miriam, because David emerged from Miriam, as it is written: “Caleb son of Ḥetzron begot Azuva, his wife, and Yeriot, and these are her sons: Yesher, Shovav, and Ardon” (I Chronicles 2:18). Azuva is Miriam. Why was she named Azuva? It is because everyone abandoned her.33Because she was sickly, none of the youths of Israel wanted to marry her. “Begot,” but wasn’t she his wife? Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Anyone who marries a woman for the sake of Heaven, the verse ascribes merit to him as though he begot her. “Yeriot,” because her face was like sheets [yeriot].34Her face was beautiful like the sheets of the Tabernacle that were beautifully dyed. “And these are her sons [baneha],” do not read it as baneha, but rather as boneha, the one who built her.35Her husband. Yesher is Caleb, because he made himself upright [yisher],36He was not swayed by the counsel of the scouts. [he is also called] Shovav, because he broke [shibev] himself,37He overcame his evil inclination and resisted the counsel of the scouts. [and he is called] Ardon, because he dominated [rida] his inclination. “Azuva died” (I Chronicles 2:19), this teaches that she fell ill and they treated her as though she were dead,38This is referring to when Miriam was afflicted with leprosy; as when necessary for mourning the dead, the children of Israel sat in place for seven days. and Caleb, too, abandoned her.39When she was a leper, Caleb left her. When she recovered, he remarried her. “Caleb took Efrat” (I Chronicles 2:19), this is Miriam. Why was she named Efrat? It is because Israel procreated [faru] thanks to her.40In Egypt, she convinced her father to remarry her mother and the rest of Israel followed suit. What is: “Took”? It means that after she recovered, he performed an act of marriage and he seated her on a sedan chair because of his great joy over her. Likewise, you find elsewhere that Miriam is called two names after events that befell her. That is what is written: “Ashḥur father of Tekoa had two wives: Ḥela and Naara.” (I Chronicles 4:5). Ashḥur is Caleb, because Ashḥur was the son of Ḥetzron. Why is he named Ashḥur? It is because his face was blackened [hishḥir] with fasts.41He fasted so that he would not be influenced by the scouts. “Father of,” because he became like a father to her; “Tekoa,” because he affixed [taka] his heart to his Father in Heaven; “had two wives,” as though they were two wives; “Ḥela and Naara,” they were not Ḥela and Naara, but rather she was Miriam. Why was she called Ḥela and Naara? It is because she was ill [ḥalta], and she shook off [ninara] her illness, and the Holy One blessed be He restored her to her youth [lenaaruta]. “Naara bore him” (I Chronicles 4:6) – after she was cured she bore him sons, “Aḥuzam and Ḥefer” (ibid.). “And the sons of Ḥela; Tzeret, Tzoḥar, and Etnan” (I Chronicles 4:7) – “Tzeret,” because she became a rival to her friends;42They were envious of her beauty. “Tzoḥar,” because her countenance was comparable to noon [tzohorayim]; “and Etnan,” because anyone who saw her would bring a gift [etnan] to his wife.43Upon seeing Miriam, one would be filled with desire and would seek to seduce one’s own wife to engage in relations. That is why it is written: “Caleb took Efrat and she bore him Ḥur” (I Chronicles 2:19).44As explained above, this verse refers to Caleb remarrying Miriam after her recovery.  From where is it derived that David descended from Miriam? It is as it is written: “David was the son of that nobleman [Efrati] from Bethlehem of Judah” (I Samuel 17:12). Likewise you find that one verse says: “And the sons of Ḥela…” [and the next verse states:] “and Kotz begot Anuv, [Hatzoveva, and the families of Aḥarḥel son of Harum]” (I Chronicles 4:8). Kotz is Caleb, who undercut [kitzetz] the counsel of the scouts. “Begot Anuv,” he adopted good deeds at the time that they brought a cluster of grapes, as were it not for Caleb, they would not have brought it. “Hatzoveva,” he fulfilled the will [tzivyono] of the Holy One blessed be He; “and the families of Aḥarḥel,” Aḥarḥel is Miriam. Why was she named that? It is on the basis of: “All the women emerged after her [aḥareha] [with drums and dances]” (Exodus 15:20). What are “families?” He was privileged to establish families from her. “Son of Harum,” she was privileged to have David, whose kingdom the Holy One blessed be He elevated, descend from her, as you say: “He will give strength to His king, etc.” (I Samuel 2:10).
“Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying: Every son that is born, you shall cast him into the Nile, and every daughter you shall keep alive” (Exodus 1:22). “Pharaoh commanded all his people,” Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥanina says: He issued the decree even against his own people. Why did he do so? It is because his astrologers said to him: ‘The redeemer of Israel has already been conceived by his mother, but we do not know whether he is Israelite or Egyptian.’ At that moment, Pharaoh gathered all the Egyptians and said to them: ‘Lend me your sons that will be born for [the next] nine months so I will cast them into the Nile.’45The belief was that the Nile River was a deity and would repay those who worshipped it. That is what is written: “Every son that is born, [you shall cast him] into the Nile.” “Every Israelite son” is not written but rather, “every son,” whether Israelite or Egyptian. But they [the Egyptians] did not want to accept it from him, as they said: ‘An Egyptian son will never redeem them, but rather, one from the Hebrew women.’ “Cast him into the Nile.” Why did they decree to cast them into the Nile? It is because the astrologers foresaw that the redeemer of Israel would be condemned by means of water, and they believed that he would drown in water. But it was, in fact, only by means of a well that the decree of death was issued against him, as it is stated: “Because you did not have faith in me…[therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land that I have given them; these are the waters of dispute…]” (Numbers 20:12–13). The Rabbis say that they [the astrologers] devised [this] counsel so that the Holy One blessed be He would not take vengeance against them by means of water. Because they knew that the punishments of the Holy One blessed be He fit the crime, and they were certain that He would not bring a flood to the world; therefore, they commanded to drown them in water. “And every daughter you shall keep alive.” Why did Pharaoh need to keep the females alive? Rather, this is what they would say: ‘We will kill the males and take the females as wives,’ because the Egyptians were engulfed with lewdness.
“A man from the house of Levi went and he took a daughter of Levi” (Exodus 2:1). “A man from the house of Levi [went].” Where did he go? Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Zevina said: He followed the counsel of his daughter. It is taught: Amram was the preeminent scholar of his generation, etc. Shemot Rabba 1:13>. “And he took a daughter of Levi.” And he remarried is not written, but rather, “he took.” Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Zevina said: He performed an act of marriage and he seated her on a litter and Miriam and Aaron were dancing before them and the ministering angels were saying: “The mother of the sons is joyous” (Psalms 113:9). “A daughter of Levi.” Is it possible that she was one hundred and thirty years old and she is called a “daughter”? Didn’t Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina say: She was Yokheved, and she was conceived on the way and was born within the walls,46She was born as Jacob and his descendants arrived in Egypt.  as it is stated: “Who was born to Levi in Egypt” (Numbers 26:59); her birth was in Egypt but not her conception. And [yet] she is called a “daughter”? Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Zevina said: Signs of young womanhood developed in her.
“The woman conceived and bore a son; she saw that he was good and she hid him for three months” (Exodus 2:2). “The woman conceived and bore a son” – Rabbi Yehuda said: Her birth is juxtaposed with her conception; just as her conception was painless, so too, her birth was painless. From here it is derived that righteous women were not included in the verdict of Eve. “She saw that he was good [tov].” It was taught that Rabbi Meir says: His name was Tov. Rabbi Yoshiya says: His name was Toviya. Rabbi Yehuda says: He was fit for prophecy. Others say: He was born circumcised. The Rabbis say: At the moment that Moses was born, the entire house was illuminated; here it is written: “She saw that he was good [tov].” There it is written: “God saw the light, that it was good [tov]” (Genesis 1:4). “She hid him for three months” because the Egyptians counted only from the moment that he remarried her, but she had already been three months pregnant from the outset. “She was no longer able to hide him, and she took for him a wicker basket and coated it with clay and with pitch; she placed the child in it and placed it among the reeds on the bank of the Nile” (Exodus 2:3). “She was no longer able to hide him” (Exodus 2:3). Why? It is because the Egyptians were going into each and every house in which they thought that a baby had been born, and would take a small Egyptian baby there and would cause him to cry, so that the Israelite baby would hear his voice and cry with him. That is what is written: “Catch us foxes, little foxes [that ruin vineyards…]” (Song of Songs 2:15). 47The verse may also be translated: “The foxes held little foxes against us in order to ruin the vineyard,” and the midrash takes it in that sense. The Egyptians are compared to foxes because they are sly as foxes, and Israel is compared to a vineyard. 
“She took for him a wicker basket” – why wicker? Rabbi Elazar said: Because for the righteous, their property is dearer to them than their bodies. Why to that extent? It is because they do not extend their hands in robbery. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is a pliable material that can withstand both soft and hard items. “And coated it with clay and with pitch” – clay inside and pitch outside, so that this righteous one would not smell a foul odor. “She placed the child in it [and placed it among the reeds on the bank of the Nile].” Rabbi Elazar said: The Sea of Reeds, as the Sea of Reeds reaches as far as the Nile. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: A marsh, as it is stated: “Cane and reeds will wither” (Isaiah 19:6). 48Meaning, the reeds mentioned in the verse are not a reference to the Sea of Reeds, but to actual reeds that grow in the shallow waters of a lake or river.  Why did she cast him into the Nile? So that the astrologers would think that he had already been cast into the water and they would no longer search for him.
“His sister positioned herself at a distance to know what would happen to him” (Exodus 2:4). “His sister positioned herself at a distance.” Why did Miriam stand at a distance? Rabbi Amram said in the name of Rav: It is because Miriam had been prophesying and saying: ‘My mother is destined to bear a son who will redeem Israel.’ When Moses was born the house was filled with light. Her father stood and kissed her on her head. He said to her: ‘My daughter, your prophecy has been fulfilled.’ That is what is written: “Miriam the prophetess, sister of Aaron, took the drum” (Exodus 15:20). [Was she] the sister of Aaron but not the sister of Moses? Rather, she said this prophecy when she was the sister of Aaron, and Moses had not yet been born. When they cast him into the Nile, her mother stood and struck her on her head. She said to her: ‘Where is your prophecy?’ That is what is written: “His sister positioned herself at a distance [to know]” – to know what would be the fate of her prophecy. The Rabbis say: The entire verse is stated as an allusion to the Divine Spirit: “Positioned herself [vatetatzav],” alluding to: “The Lord came and stood [vayityatzev]” (I Samuel 3:10); “his sister,” alluding to: “Say to wisdom: You are my sister” (Proverbs 7:4); “at a distance,” alluding to: “From a distance the Lord appeared to me” (Jeremiah 31:2); “to know [lede’a] what would happen to him,” alluding to: “As the Lord is a God of knowledge [de’ot]” (I Samuel 2:3).
“The daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe in the Nile while her maidens were walking on the bank of the Nile. She saw the basket among the reeds and she sent her maidservant [amatah] and she took it” (Exodus 2:5). “To bathe in the Nile” (Exodus 2:5) – to wash off the idolatry of her father’s home. “While her maidens were walking [holekhot],” Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The term halikha here is nothing other than an expression of death, and likewise it says: “Behold, I am going [holekh] to die” (Genesis 25:32). They said to her: ‘Our mistress, the way of the world is that a king issues a decree and the entire world does not fulfill it, but his children and the members of his household fulfill it; and you are violating the command of your father.’ Immediately, [the angel] Gabriel came and slammed them onto the ground [and killed them]. “She sent her maidservant [amatah] and she took it.” Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, one says her arm, and one says her maidservant. The reason for the one who says “her arm” is that amatah is written.49Had the verse been referring to her maidservant, it should have said na’aratah, maiden, which is the expression employed earlier in the verse. The reason for the one who says “her maidservant” is that yadah50The more common term for “her arm.”  is not written. According to the opinion of the one who says her maidservant, when Gabriel came and slammed them onto the ground, he spared one of them, as it is not the way of a princess to remain alone. They raise an objection: According to the one who says “her hand,” let it write “yadah.” This is not difficult, as this is the reason that amatah is written, because her arm was stretched.51Her arm stretched, so it was the length of several cubits (amot). We learned: Likewise you find: “You have broken [shibarta] the teeth of the wicked” (Psalms 3:8); do not read it as shibarta, but rather as shirbavta, that you enlarged and extended. The Rabbis say: Pharaoh’s daughter was a leper; that is why she went to bathe. When she touched the basket she was cured. That is why she had compassion for Moses and loved him exceedingly.
“She opened it and saw the child [yeled], and behold, a boy [na’ar] crying. She had compassion for him and she said: This is from the children of the Hebrews” (Exodus 2:6). “She opened it and saw,” – it does not say “she saw,” but rather, “she saw him.”52It could have said: “She saw the child” but a more literal translation is “she saw him, the child.” Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: She saw the Divine Presence with him. “And behold, a boy [na’ar] crying.” It calls him na’ar [literally, lad] and it calls him yeled [literally, child]. It is taught: He was a child but his voice was like that of a lad, this is the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: If so, you have rendered Moses, of blessed memory, blemished. Rather, it teaches that his mother made him a canopy for grooms53This is a cloak which is wrapped around a groom. It is decorated with a crown-like ornamentation at the top. in the basket. “Crying,” – he was crying and saying: Perhaps I will not have the privilege of seeing my sister who is waiting for me. Alternatively, “behold, a boy [na’ar] crying,” – he was a child but he conducted himself like a lad [na’ar]. Gabriel came and struck Moses so that he would cry and she would be filled with compassion for him. “She had compassion for him.” When she saw him crying, she had compassion for him. “She said: This is from the children of the Hebrews.” How did she ascertain this about him? Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: She saw that he was circumcised. “This [is from the children of the Hebrews],” – what is “this”? This one has fallen into the Nile, but no other will fall into the Nile, as once they cast Moses into the Nile, the decree was abrogated, like that which Rabbi Elazar said: What is it that is written? “And if they will say to you: Consult the mediums and the necromancers who chirp [hametzaftzefim] and mutter [hamagim]” (Isaiah 8:19). They prognosticate [tzofim] but they do not know what they prognosticate, and they pontificate [hogim] but they do not know what they pontificate. They saw that the redeemer of Israel will be condemned by means of water. They rose and decreed: “Every son who is born [you shall cast him into the Nile]” (Exodus 1:22). Once Moses was cast into the water, they said: ‘Their redeemer has already been cast in the water.’ Immediately, they abrogated the decree. But they did not know that he would be stricken over the waters of dispute, like that which Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: What is it that is written: “These54This is an indication that these waters were familiar from some previous occurrence. are the waters of dispute” (Numbers 20:13). Pharaoh’s astrologers saw these [waters] and were mistaken. Similarly, “six hundred thousand men on foot [ragli]” (Numbers 11:21); Moses said to Israel: Because of me55The word ragli can be interpreted as because of me (see Genesis 30:30). The midrash claims that Moses is saying that because he was placed in the river, the decree to throw the boys in the river was abrogated. all of you were saved. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: That day was the twenty-first of Nisan. The ministering angels said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, shall he who is destined to recite a song at the sea on this date be stricken by water on this day?’ Rav Aḥa bar Ḥanina said: That day was the sixth of Sivan. The ministering angels said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Shall he who is destined to receive the Torah on Mount Sinai on this day be stricken on this day?’ They raised an objection: On the seventh of Adar Moses was born. According to the opinion of the one who says on the sixth of Sivan he was cast into the Nile, it works out well, as from the seventh of Adar until the sixth of Sivan are the three months that he was hidden. However, according to the one who says it was on the twenty-first of Nisan, it does not work out well. But it is not a difficulty, as that year was a leap year; most of the first month, most of the last month, and the entire middle month are considered three months.56Moses was born on the seventh day of the first Adar. Therefore, from his birth until the twenty-first of Nisan there were twenty-three days of the first Adar, the entire second Adar, and twenty-one days in Nisan.
“His sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter: Shall I go and call you a nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” (Exodus 2:7).  “His sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, etc.” Why did Miriam say: “From the Hebrew women”? Was it prohibited for Moses to nurse from the milk of a gentile woman? That is not what we learned: A Jewish woman may not nurse the son of a gentile woman, but a gentile woman may nurse the son of a Jewish woman on [the Jewish woman’s] property (Avoda Zara 26a). Why did she say so? It is because [Pharaoh’s daughter] had passed Moses around to all the Egyptian women to nurse him, but he rejected them all. Why did he reject them? The Holy One blessed be He said: Shall the mouth that is destined to speak with Me imbibe an impure substance? That is what is written: “To whom will one teach knowledge, [and who can understand a lesson? Those weaned from milk, detached from breasts”] (Isaiah 28:9). To whom will [God] teach knowledge? To those weaned from milk, etc. Alternatively, why did he reject their breasts? The Holy One blessed be He said: This one is destined to speak with Me. Tomorrow the Egyptian women will say: ‘This one who is speaking with the Divine Spirit, I nursed him.’ “Pharaoh’s daughter said to her: Go. The girl went and called the mother of the child” (Exodus 2:8).  “The girl [alma] went.” Why did the verse call her alma? It is because she went with alacrity.57Alma typically refers to a young adult woman. Rabbi Shmuel said: It is because she was guarded in her words.58She did not tell Pharaoh’s daughter that she was the child’s sister and that she was calling child’s mother.  “Pharaoh’s daughter said to her: Take this child and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages. The woman took the child and she nursed him” (Exodus 2:9). “Pharaoh’s daughter said to her: Take [heilikhi].” Rabbi Ḥama bar Rabbi Ḥanina said: She prophesied, but she did not know what she prophesied: Heilikhi, he is yours.59The term heilikhi is interpreted as though it was two words: Hei likhi, this is yours.  “And I will give you your wages.” Rabbi Ḥama bar Rabbi Ḥanina said: It is not enough for the righteous that their lost items are returned to them; they also receive a reward. “The woman took the child and she nursed him.” At that moment, the Holy One blessed be He gave her a partial reward. She had sustained the children, and likewise, the Holy One blessed be He returned her son to her and gave her wages.
“The child grew and she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter and he was a son to her. She named him Moses and she said: Because I drew him from the water” (Exodus 2:10). “The child grew.” She nursed him for twenty-four months and you say “the child grew”? Rather, it was that he was growing in a manner that was atypical in the land. “She brought her to Pharaoh’s daughter…” Pharaoh’s daughter was kissing, hugging, and loving him as though he were her son, and would not take him out of the king’s palace. Because he was beautiful, everyone desired to see him, and anyone who saw him would not leave him. Pharaoh would kiss him and hug him, and he would take Pharaoh’s crown and place it on his head, as he was destined to do when he grew older. Likewise, the Holy One blessed be He said to Ḥiram: “I have drawn fire from your midst….” (Ezekiel 28:18),60Meaning, the fire that will destroy him will originate in his household. and likewise Pharaoh’s daughter was raising the one who was destined to exact retribution from her father. The messianic king, too, who is destined to exact retribution from Edom, resides with them in the same country, as it is stated: “There the calf will graze and there it will lie [and consume its branches]” (Isaiah 27:10). The magicians of Egypt were sitting there, and said: ‘we are afraid of this one who takes your crown and places it on his head, lest he be the one regarding whom we said that he is destined to wrest your kingdom from you.’ Some of them said to behead him, some said to burn him. Yitro was sitting in their midst and saying to them: ‘This boy has no intelligence. Rather, test him. Bring before him a bowl with gold and a hot coal. If he extends his hand to the gold, he has intelligence and [you should] execute him; and if he extends his hand to the coal, he has no intelligence and he has no sentence of death.’ Immediately, they brought it before him and he extended his hand to take the gold. Gabriel came and pushed his hand. He seized the coal and placed his hand with the coal into his mouth, and his tongue was burned. From that he became “slow of speech and slow of tongue” (Exodus 4:10). “She named him Moses” – from here you learn the reward of those who perform of acts of kindness. Although Moses had many names, the name that was set for him throughout the Torah was only the one that Batya daughter of Pharaoh called him. Even the Holy One blessed be He did not call him by any other name.
“It was in those days, Moses grew and went out to his brethren, and he saw their burdens; he saw an Egyptian man beating a Hebrew man of his brethren” (Exodus 2:11). “It was in those days, Moses grew,” – Moses was twenty years old at that time, and some say forty years old. “Moses grew.” Doesn’t everyone grow? Rather, it is telling you that he grew in an atypical manner. “And went out to his brethren,” this righteous one went out twice61Moses left the palace twice to check on his brethren. and the Holy One blessed be He wrote them one after another; “he went out on the second day” (Exodus 2:13), these are two. “He saw their burdens.” What is “he saw”? He would see their burdens and cry and say: ‘Woe is me over you; would that I could die for you. There is no labor more arduous than labor with mortar.’ He would shoulder [the burdens] and help each and every one of them. Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: He saw a large burden on a small man and a small burden on a large man; the burden of a man on a woman and the burden of a woman on a man; the burden of an elderly man on a lad and the burden of a lad on an elderly man. He would leave his royal guard and would arrange their burdens, feigning as though he was helping Pharaoh. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘You left your affairs and went to observe the Israelite’s suffering, and you treated them in a brotherly manner; I will leave the upper and lower worlds to speak with you.’ That is what is written: “The Lord saw that he had turned to see” (Exodus 3:4); the Holy One blessed be He saw that he turned from his affairs to see their burdens; therefore, “God called to him from the midst of the bush” (ibid.).
Alternatively, “he saw their burdens,” – he saw that they had no respite. He went and said to Pharaoh: ‘One who has a slave, if he does not rest one day a week, he will die. These are your slaves. If you do not allow them to rest one day a week they will die.’ He said to him: ‘Go and do with them whatever you say.’ Moses went and instituted the day of Shabbat for rest. “He saw an Egyptian man.” What did he see? Rav Huna said in the name of bar Kapara: Because of four matters, Israel was redeemed from Egypt: One, because they did not change their names.62The continuation of this list is found in Vayikra Rabba 32:5: They did not change their names or language, they did not speak slander, and none of them informed the Egyptians that they were not intending to return the vessels they borrowed before leaving Egypt.  From where is it derived that they were not suspected of licentiousness? The fact is that there was one woman63Only one woman engaged in licentiousness.  and the verse publicized her, as it is stated: “[The son of an Israelite woman and he was the son of an Egyptian man]…and the name of his mother was Shelomit bat Divri….” (Leviticus 24: 10–11). Our Sages, of blessed memory, say: The taskmasters were Egyptian and the foremen were Israelite; one taskmaster was appointed over ten foremen, and one foreman was appointed over ten Israelites. The taskmasters would go to the homes of the foremen early in the morning to get them out to work with the crowing of the rooster. Once, an Egyptian taskmaster went to an Israelite foreman and directed his glance to his wife, who was beautiful and flawless. He arrived there at the time of the crowing of the rooster and got him out of the house. The Egyptian returned and consorted with his wife, as she thought it was her husband, and she was impregnated. Her husband returned and saw the Egyptian emerging from his home. He asked her: ‘Did he touch you?’ She said: ‘Yes, and I thought he was you.’ Once the taskmaster realized that [the Israelite] had sensed what he had done, he returned him to hard labor, and was beating him, seeking to kill him. Moses was looking at him and watching him, and he saw by means of the Divine Spirit what he had done at his home and saw what he was going to do to him in the field. He said: ‘This one is certainly liable for execution, as it is written: “One who strikes a person shall be put to death” (Leviticus 24:21). Moreover, he consorted with Datan’s wife and for that he is liable for execution, as it is stated: “The adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death”’ (Leviticus 20:10). That is what is written: “He turned this way and that [and saw that there was no man; he smote the Egyptian and concealed him in the sand]” (Exodus 2:12) – he saw what he had done to him in the house and what he had done to him in the field.
“He turned this way and that and saw that there was no man; he smote the Egyptian and concealed him in the sand” (Exodus 2:12).  “He saw that there was no man,” because he was deserving of death. Rabbi Yehuda says: There was no man who would be zealous on behalf of the Holy One blessed be He, and kill him. Rabbi Neḥemya says: He saw that there was no one who would invoke the name of God and kill him. The Rabbis say: He saw that there was no expectation that righteous people would emerge from him or from his descendants until the end of all the generations. When Moses saw this, he consulted with the angels and said to them: ‘Is this one liable for execution?’ They said: ‘Yes.’ That is what is written: “He saw that there was no man” – who would speak in his favor. “He smote the Egyptian.” With what did he kill him? Rabbi Evyatar said: He struck him with a fist. Some say: He took a mortar rake and removed his brain. The Rabbis say: He invoked the name of God and killed him, as it is stated; “Do you propose [omer] to kill me [as you killed the Egyptian?]” (Exodus 2:14). “He concealed him in the sand” as there was no one there other than Israelites. He concealed him before Israel, who were likened to sand. He said to them: ‘You were likened to sand; just as sand, a person takes it from here and places it there and no sound is heard, so too, this matter will remain concealed among you and will not be heard.’ Indeed, you find that the matter was heard only by means of the Hebrews, as it is stated: “He went out on the second day and behold, two Hebrew men were fighting [nitzim]; [he said to the wicked one: why do you strike your counterpart?]” (Exodus 2:13). These are Datan and Aviram, and it called them nitzim after their end.64“They are Datan and Aviram…who agitated [hitzu] against Moses…when they agitated [behatzotam] against the Lord” (Numbers 26:9). It was they who said this matter, it was they who left over some of the manna. It was they who said: “Let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt” (Numbers 14:4). And it was they who agitated at the Red Sea. Alternatively, [they are called] nitzim because they intended to kill one another, as it is said: “If men fight together” (Deuteronomy 25:11), and Rabbi Elazar said: The verse is referring to a fight to the death. “He said to the wicked one: Why do you strike your counterpart?” Why did you strike is not stated, but rather “why do you strike.” From here it is derived that from the moment that a person raises his hand against another, even if he does not strike him, he is called wicked. “Your counterpart,” who is wicked like you are; this teaches both of them were wicked.
“He said: Who appointed you a ruler and judge over us? Do you propose to kill me as you killed the Egyptian? Moses was frightened and said: Indeed, the matter is known” (Exodus 2:14). “Who appointed you a ruler [and judge [ish sar veshofet] over us?]” – Rabbi Yehuda says: Moses was twenty years old at that time. They said to him: ‘You are not yet eligible to be a ruler and a judge over us, because [only] one who is forty years old has understanding’ (Avot 5:25). Rabbi Neḥemya says that he was forty years old. They said to him: ‘Certainly you are a man [ish], but you are not eligible to be a ruler and a judge [sar veshofet] over us.’ The Rabbis say that they said to him: ‘Aren’t you the son of Yokheved? How do they call you son of Batya? You seek to be a ruler and a judge over us? We will inform about you, what you did to the Egyptian.’ “Do you propose [omer] to kill me?” Do you seek to kill me is not stated, but rather do you omer [literally, say]. From here you learn that he had invoked the ineffable name against the Egyptian, and killed him. When he heard this,65When Moses heard the response of the Hebrew man he had rebuked.  he feared slander and he said: “Indeed, the matter is known.” Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shalom [said] in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina the Great, and our Rabbis said in the name of Rabbi Alexandri: Moshe was pondering in his heart and saying: What sin did Israel commit that caused them, more than all the nations, to be enslaved? When he heard his response, he said: ‘There is slander in their midst, how can they be deserving of redemption?’ Therefore he said: “Indeed the matter is known” – now I know the reason for their enslavement.
“Pharaoh heard this matter and he sought to kill Moses. Moses fled from before Pharaoh, and he settled in the land of Midyan, and sat alongside the well” (Exodus 2:15). “Pharaoh heard” – because Datan and Aviram arose and informed on him. “He sought to kill Moses.” Pharaoh sent and they brought an incomparable sword and he struck his neck ten times, but Moses’s neck became like an ivory tower and it did not harm him, as it is stated: “Your neck is like an ivory tower” (Song of Songs 7:5). “Moses fled from before Pharaoh.” Rabbi Yannai says: Is it possible for flesh and blood to flee from the monarchy? Rather, at the moment that they apprehended Moses and sentenced him to beheading, an angel descended from the heavens and appeared to them in the image of Moses. They seized the angel and Moses fled. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: All the legal advisers who were sitting before Pharaoh became [impaired]; some mute, some deaf, and some blind. He [Pharaoh] was saying to the mutes: ‘Where is Moses?’ but they did not talk; to the deaf, but they did not hear; to the blind, but they did not see. That is what the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: “Who gives a mouth to man?” (Exodus 4:11). Who gave a mouth to Pharaoh, who said with his mouth: ‘Bring Moses to the platform to execute him’? “Or who makes one mute,” (ibid.) – who rendered the deputies mute, deaf, and blind so they did not bring you? And who made you clever so you would flee? “Is it not I, the Lord?” (ibid.). I was with you there, and I stand with you today.
“He settled in the land of Midyan, and sat alongside the well.” He learned the way of the patriarchs. Three were paired with their mates at the well; Isaac, Jacob, and Moses. Regarding Isaac, it is written: “Isaac came from going to Be’er [laḥai ro’i]” (Genesis 24:62).66This is the well where God had once appeared to Hagar. This is the context in which Isaac met Rebecca, who was returning with Abraham’s servant, identified by the midrash as Eliezer. Isaac then married her; see Genesis 24:63-67.  Moreover, Rebecca met Eliezer near the spring. Jacob, “he saw, and behold, there was a well in the field” (Genesis 29:2); 67It was there that Jacob first met Rachel; see Genesis 29:10-11.  Moses, “and he sat alongside the well.” “The priest of Midian had seven daughters; they came and they drew water and filled the troughs to give their father’s flock to drink” (Exodus 2:16). “The priest of Midian had seven daughters.” But doesn’t the Holy One blessed be He hate idol worship, and yet He provided Moses haven with an idol worshipper? Rather, our Rabbis said: Yitro was a priest for idol worship and he saw that it lacked substance, and he scorned it, and he thought about repenting before Moses arrived. He called the residents of his city and said: ‘Until now, I have served you. Now I am old; choose another priest.’ He arose and removed the service vessels of idol worship and gave them all to them. They arose and ostracized him so that no one should have ties with him, no one should perform labor for him, and no one should herd his flocks. He asked the shepherds to herd his flocks for him, but they did not agree; therefore, he sent his daughters out. “They came and they drew.” It teaches that they would arrive early due to fear of the shepherds. “The shepherds came and drove them away; Moses rose and rescued them and gave their flocks to drink” (Genesis 2:17). “The shepherds came and drove them away.” Is it possible that he was the priest of Midyan and the shepherds were driving away his daughters? Rather, it teaches you that they ostracized him and drove away his daughters like a divorced woman, like you say: “He drove out the man” (Genesis 3:24).68In this verse, God permanently banished man from the Garden of Eden. So too, the shepherds sought to permanently banish Yitro’s daughters.  “Moses rose and rescued them.” This teaches that he sat in judgment regarding them.69This is derived from the fact that the verse says that he rose, indicating that beforehand he was sitting. He said: Typically, men draw the water and women give the flocks to drink, while here, women draw and men give the flocks to drink. It does not say “he saved them [vayatzilan],” but rather, “he rescued them [vayoshian].” Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: They came to engage with them in a matter of forbidden sexual relations; here it is stated: “Moses rose and rescued them ,” and there it is stated: “The betrothed young woman screamed, and there was no one to rescue her” (Deuteronomy 22:27). Just as there, it is referring to forbidden sexual relations, here too it is referring to forbidden sexual relations. The Rabbis say: This teaches that they cast them into the water and Moses saved them. Vayoshian is nothing other than an expression of saving from water, as it is stated: “Rescue me God, as the water has reached my soul” (Psalms 69:2). “And gave their flocks to drink.” This teaches that Moses drew water for them and gave their flocks to drink, just as Jacob did for Rachel. “They came to their father Reuel. He said: Why were you quick to come today?” (Exodus 2:18). “They came to their father Reuel.” This is Yitro. Why is he named Reuel? It is because he became a companion to God. “He said: Why were you quick to come today?” From here you learn that on all days they would come last. “They said: An Egyptian man saved us from the shepherds and also drew water for us and gave the flock to drink” (Exodus 2:19). “They said: An Egyptian man saved us from the shepherds.” Was Moses an Egyptian? Rather, his garb was Egyptian, but he was a Hebrew. Alternatively, “an Egyptian man,” this is analogous to one who was bitten by a deadly snake and was running to put his legs in water. He placed them in the river and saw a certain child sinking in the water, and he extended his hand and saved him. The child said to him: ‘Were it not for you, I would have died.’ He said to him: ‘It is not I who saved you, but rather, the deadly snake that bit me and I fled from it; it saved you.’ Similarly, Yitro’s daughters said to Moses: ‘Well done that you saved us from the shepherds.’ Moses said to them: ‘That Egyptian whom I killed, he saved you.’ That is why they said to their father, “an Egyptian man saved us,” in other words: Who caused this one to come to us? It is the Egyptian man whom he killed. “Drew water [dalo dala],” he drew one drawing of water and gave water to all the flocks to drink, and the water was blessed for his sake. That is what is written: “and gave the flock to drink.” Our flock is not written, but rather “the flock,” as he gave even the flocks of the shepherds to drink. What then is “for us”? It means that he drew us out, too, as the shepherds cast us into the water and he took us out. “He said to his daughters: Where is he? Why did you leave the man? Call him so that he will eat bread” (Exodus 2:20). “He said to his daughters: Where is he?” He said to them: ‘The fact that you say that he drew water and gave water to all the flocks is an indicator that he is one of the descendants of Jacob who stood at the well and the water was blessed for his sake.’ “Why did you leave the man? [Call him so that he will eat bread],” – perhaps he will marry one of you. The eating of bread mentioned here refers to nothing other than a wife, similar to: “Except for the bread that he eats” (Genesis 39:6).70Joseph stated this in reference to Potifar’s wife. Immediately, Tzipora ran after him like a bird [tzipor] and brought him. Why was she named Tzipora? It is because she purified the house like a bird.71The bird plays a central role in the purification process of a leprous house; see Leviticus 14:48-53 
“Moses decided to dwell with the man, and he gave his daughter Tzipora to Moses” (Exodus 2:21). “Moses decided [vayoel]” – Rabbi Yehuda says that he took an oath to him, as vayoel is nothing other than an expression of an oath, as it is stated: “Saul administered an oath [vayoel] to the people” (I Samuel 14:24). Why did he administer an oath to him? He said to him: ‘I know that Jacob your ancestor, when Lavan gave him his daughters, he took them and left without [Lavan’s] knowledge. Perhaps, if I give you my daughter you will do the same to me.’ Immediately, [Moses] took an oath to him, and [Yitro] gave him Tzipora. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He accepted upon himself to stay the night with him, as vayoel is nothing other than an expression of staying the night, as it is stated: “Please agree [hoel] and stay the night” (Judges 19:6). Our Rabbis, of blessed memory, said that he accepted upon himself to herd his flocks, as vayoel is nothing other than an expression of beginning. When he married his daughter, he began and accepted upon himself to herd his flocks. “She bore a son and he named him Gershom because he said: I was a stranger [ger] in a foreign land” (Exodus 2:22). “She bore a son and he named him Gershom.” It is the way of the righteous to name their sons after an event. In Joseph’s regard what does it say? “He named the firstborn Manasseh…and the second he named Ephraim”72Manasseh, “because God has made me forget [nashani] all my toil and all my father’s household.” Ephraim, “because God has made me fruitful [hifrani] in the land of my affliction.” (Genesis 41:51–52), in order to recall the miracles that the Holy One blessed be He performed on his behalf. Moses, too, named his son Gershom after the miracle that the Lord performed on his behalf; that he was a stranger in a foreign land, and the Holy One blessed be He brought him success there.
“It was during those many days that the king of Egypt died and the children of Israel sighed due to the work, and they cried out. Their plea rose to God due to the work” (Exodus 2:23).  “It was during those many days.” They were days of suffering; therefore, it calls them many. Similarly, “and a woman, if her flow of blood shall flow many days” (Leviticus 15:25); because they are days of suffering, it calls them many. “The king of Egypt died.” He was afflicted with leprosy, and a leper is considered as dead, as it is stated: “Let her not be like a corpse” (Numbers 12:12),73Aaron said this when Miriam was afflicted with leprosy. and it says: “It was during the year of the death of King Uzziahu” (Isaiah 6:1).74King Uziahu was afflicted with leprosy. “The children of Israel sighed [due to the work, and they cried out [vayizaku]].” Why did they sigh? It is because the magicians of Egypt said [to Pharaoh]: ‘Your only cure is to slaughter from among the Israelite young, one hundred and fifty in the evening and one hundred and fifty in the morning, and bathe in their blood twice a day.’ When Israel heard the harsh decree, they began groaning and lamenting. Vayizaku is nothing other than a term denoting lamentation, as it is written: “Cry out [ze’ak] and lament, son of man” (Ezekiel 21:17). “Their plea [shavatam] rose to God.” It does not say “their outcry [tza’akatam],” but rather, their plea [shavatam], as it is stated: “And the souls of the dead plead [teshave’a]” (Job 24:12). “God heard their moaning and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob” (Exodus 2:24). “God heard their moaning [na’akatam],” the moaning of the slain, as it is said: “He will moan [vena’ak] the moans of the slain” (Ezekiel 30:24), and as it is said: “They moan [yinaku] from a populated [metim]75The term metim is expounded as though it were vocalized with a tzerei, meaning “the dead,” instead of a sheva, which is how it is vocalized in the verse. When vocalized with a sheva, it means “populated.”  city” (Job 24:12). “God remembered His covenant.” Israel was not worthy of being saved, because they were wicked, but they were redeemed because of the merit of the patriarchs. That is what is written: “God remembered His covenant.” Our Rabbis, of blessed memory, say: A miracle was performed on their behalf and [Pharaoh] was cured from his leprosy.
“God saw the children of Israel, and God knew” (Exodus 2:25). “God saw the children of Israel,” as it is stated: “I have seen the affliction of My people” (Exodus 3:7). “And God knew” (Exodus 2:25); “as I know its pains” (Exodus 3:7). Alternatively, “God saw” that they did not have good deeds for which their redemption would be warranted. Likewise, it is explicated by Ezekiel: “I rendered you as numerous as the plants of the field [and you increased and grew, and you came to great beauty: Breasts developed and your hair grew, but you were naked and bare]” (Ezekiel 16:7). It should have said “and your hair grew” and only then “breasts developed,” as the lower sign of puberty precedes the upper one. Rather, what is “breasts developed [nakhonu]”? These are Moses and Aaron, who were prepared [nekhonim] to redeem them, as it is written: “Your two breasts76This phrase is expounded as referring to Moses and Aaron. are like two fawns” (Song of Songs 4:5). “And your hair grew,” the time of the redemption has arrived.77Pubic hair serves as the sign of the culmination of childhood and the beginning of adulthood. “But you were naked and bare,” bereft of good deeds; therefore, it states: “God saw” that they did not have any good deeds for which their redemption would be warranted.
“God saw the children of Israel, and God knew.” The Holy One blessed be He knew that it was incumbent upon Him to redeem them for the sake of His name, and because of the covenant that he made with the patriarchs. Likewise it says: “God remembered His covenant” (Exodus 2:24). And that is what He said by means of Ezekiel: “But I acted for the sake of My name” (Ezekiel 20:9). Alternatively, “God saw,” – Reish Lakish said that He saw that they were destined to be defiant at the Red Sea, as it is written: “They were defiant at the Red Sea” (Psalms 106:7). “And God knew,” He knew that they were destined to say: “This is my God” (Exodus 15:2). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He saw that they were destined to say: “This is your god, Israel” (Exodus 32:4).78This was stated in reference to the golden calf.  “And God knew” that they were destined to say “we will do” before “we will listen.”79By accepting the obligation to perform the commandments before even hearing what they were, the Israelites demonstrated their faith in God (see Exodus 24:7).  The Rabbis say: “God saw” that the mediocre people repented, and even the wicked contemplated repenting, as it is written: “The fig tree developed its unripe figs” (Song of Songs 2:13).80The unripe figs represent the wicked; they began to develop, even though their repentance was not outwardly discernible. The verse continues: “And the vines in blossom emitted fragrance,” which is a reference to the mediocre people, who actually repented, and therefore their repentance was outwardly discernible, like a fragrance. “And God knew” [indicates] that one did not even know about another; only the Holy One blessed be He knew. This one was focusing his heart, and that one was focusing his heart, and they were repenting. But even though they repented, were it not for the merit of the patriarchs, they would not have emerged from there, because the attribute of justice was denouncing them because of the calf that they were destined to craft. Regarding this, it is written: “You shall take a bundle of hyssop” (Exodus 12:22), because they lowered themselves like a hyssop, to repent. “And dip it into the blood that is in the basin,” (ibid.), due to the merit of the Torah that they were destined to receive, as it is written at the revelation at Sinai: “Moses took the blood” (Exodus 24:8). And it is written: “And touch the lintel” (Exodus 12:22), as Abraham was the greatest of the converts; just as the lintel is high, so too, he was the greatest of the patriarchs; “and the two doorposts” (ibid.), in the merit of Isaac and Jacob, to teach you that it was due to the merit of all of them [the patriarchs] that they emerged. Alternatively, “God saw” the forced separation between them. “And God knew” that the time that He said to Abraham was approaching, and He appeared to Moses to inform him, while he was herding the flocks.

Section: Leviticus_Rabbah
“He called to Moses, and the Lord spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting, saying” (Leviticus 1:1). “He called to Moses” – Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai began: “Bless the Lord, His emissaries [malakhav], mighty in strength, who perform His bidding…” (Psalms 103:20). Regarding whom is the verse speaking?1The term malakhim most commonly refers to angels, God’s supernal emissaries, but can also refer to human beings.  If the verse is speaking of the supernal, but is it not already stated: “Bless the Lord, all His hosts” (Psalms 103:21)? It is speaking, rather, of the earthly. Because the supernal are able to successfully perform the tasks of the Holy One blessed be He, it is stated [of them]: “Bless the Lord, all His hosts.” But because the earthly are unable to successfully perform the tasks of the Holy One blessed be He, it is stated [of them]: “Bless the Lord, His emissaries,” but not all his emissaries.2Because most human beings do not live up to God’s expectations, the verse does not state “Bless the Lord, all His emissaries.” It leaves out the word “all,” as God does not want the blessings of the wicked (Etz Yosef).  Another matter: The prophets were called malakhim – that is what is written: “He sent a malakh and took us out of Egypt…” (Numbers 20:16). Was it an angel? Was it not Moses? Why does it call him a malakh? It is because the prophets are called malakhim. Similarly, “The malakh of the Lord ascended from Gilgal to Bokhim” (Judges 2:1) – was it an angel? Was it not Pinḥas? Why does it call him a malakh? Rather, Rabbi Simon said: When the Divine Spirit would rest upon Pinḥas, his face would shine like a torch. The Rabbis say: What was Manoaḥ’s wife saying to him?  “a man of God came to me, and his appearance was like the appearance of an angel of God” (Judges 13:6). She thought that he was a prophet, but he was none other than an angel. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: By their very nature the prophets are called malakhim.3The word malakh literally means emissary, and the role of a prophet is to present God’s word to the people (Rabbi David Luria).  That is what is written: “Haggai, the malakh of the Lord, on mission from the Lord, said” (Haggai 1:13). Perforce, you learn that by their very nature, the prophets are called malakhim. “Mighty in strength, who perform His bidding” (Psalms 103:20) – regarding whom is the verse speaking? Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The verse is speaking of those who observe the Sabbatical Year. The way of the world is that a person performs a mitzva for one day, for one week, for one month. But does one do so for the rest of the days of the year? Yet this one sees his field fallow, his vineyard fallow, and pays his land tax and remains silent. Is there anyone mightier than that? If you say that it is not speaking of those who observe the Sabbatical Year, it is stated here: “Who perform His bidding [devaro],” and it is stated there: “This is the matter of [devar] the Sabbatical Year” (Deuteronomy 15:2). Just as when davar is stated there the verse is speaking of those who observe the Sabbatical Year, so too, when davar stated here, the verse is speaking of those who observe the Sabbatical Year. “Who perform His bidding” – Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The verse is speaking of Israel when they stood before Mount Sinai, for having preceded performance to heeding and having said: “Everything that the Lord has spoken we will perform and we will heed” (Exodus 24:7).4They undertook to perform God’s commands before even hearing what they were. This took great spiritual strength.  “Hearing His word” (Psalms 103:20) – Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai said: The way of the world is that a burden that is difficult for one is easy for two; [one that is difficult] for two is easy for four. But can a burden that is difficult for six hundred thousand be easy for one? All of Israel was standing before Mount Sinai and saying: “If we continue to hear [the voice of the Lord our God, we will die]” (Deuteronomy 5:22), and Moses was hearing the voice of the divine speech himself, and he lived. Know that it is so, as from all of them, He called only Moses. That is why it is stated: “He called to Moses.”
Rabbi Abbahu began: “Those who dwell in His shade will return” (Hosea 14:8) – these are the proselytes who come and take shelter in the shade of the Holy One blessed be He. “They will give life to grain” (Hosea 14:8) – they will become primary like Israel, just as it says: “There will be grain for the young men, and new wine will make the young women sing” (Zechariah 9:17).1The Hebrew phrase degan baḥurim, translated here as, “there will be grain for the young men,” can also be understood to mean “the young men are grain.” Thus, the young men of Israel are compared to grain, which are the primary form of nourishment, and the proselytes are also compared to grain.  “They will blossom like the vine” (Hosea 14:8) – just as it says: “You transported a vine from Egypt, drove out the nations and planted it” (Psalms 80:9). Another matter: “They will give life to grain” (Hosea 14:8) – in the Talmud.2The midrash interprets the verse to mean “they will be given life through grain,” and understands “grain” as an allusion to the Talmud (Etz Yosef). Just as grain nourishes the body, the Talmud nourishes the soul (Maharzu).  “They will blossom like the vine” (Hosea 14:8) – in aggada. “Its repute will be like the wine of Lebanon” (Hosea 14:8) – the Holy One blessed be He said: The names of proselytes are dear to me like wine libations that are offered before Me on the altar.  Why is [the Temple] called Lebanon? It is in accordance with: “That good mountain and the Lebanon” (Deuteronomy 3:25).3Lebanon in this verse is understood to refer to the Temple; see Sifri, Va’etḥanan 28; Rashi on Deuteronomy 3:25).  Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Why is it called Lebanon? Because it whitens [malbin] the iniquities of Israel like snow. That is what is written: “If your sins will be like scarlet, they will be whitened as snow; if they will be reddened like crimson, they will be like wool” (Isaiah 1:18). Rabbi Tavyomei said: It is because all the hearts [levavot] rejoice in it. That is what is written: “Beautiful in its view, joy of the entire world…” (Psalms 48:3). The Rabbis say: It is in accordance with: “My eyes and My heart [velibi] will be there always” (I Kings 9:3).
Rabbi Simon, in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, and Rabbi Ḥama father of Rabbi Hoshaya, in the name of Rav, said: Chronicles was given only for expounding. “His Judahite wife bore Yered father of Gedor, [Ḥever father of Sokho, and Yekutiel father of Zano'aḥ; these are the sons of Bitya daughter of Pharaoh whom Mered took as a wife]” (I Chronicles 4:18). “His Judahite wife” – this is Yokheved. Was she from the tribe of Judah? Was she not from the tribe of Levi? Why was she called Judahite? It is because she brought Jews into the world.4Yokheved is identified as Shifra, one of the Israelite midwives in Egypt (Sota 11b). “Bore Yered” (I Chronicles 4:18) – this is Moses. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and Rabbi Simon: Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: “Yered” – because he brought down [horid] the Torah from [the heavens] above to [the earth] below. Alternatively: “Yered” – because he brought down the Divine Presence from [the heavens] above to [the earth] below. Rabbi Simon said: Yered is nothing other than an expression of kingship, just as it says: “He will rule [veyerd] from sea to sea” (Psalms 72:8); and it is written: “For he ruled [rodeh] over the entire region beyond the river” (I Kings 5:4). “Father of Gedor” (I Chronicles 4:18) – Rabbi Huna bar Aḥa said: Many fence builders [goderin] stood for Israel, but [Moses] was the father of them all.5The term fence builder is used here to connote one who delineates the boundary of what behavior God deems acceptable, or who establishes decrees to protect against transgression.  “Ḥever” (I Chronicles 4:18) – because he connected [ḥiber] the children to their Father in Heaven; alternatively, “Ḥever” – who prevented [he’evir] calamity from coming to the world. “Father of Sokho” (I Chronicles 4:18) – as he was the father of the prophets who see [sokhin] by means of the Divine Spirit. Rabbi Levi said: It is an Arabic expression, as in Arabia they call prophets sakhya. “Yekutiel” (I Chronicles 4:18) – Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Sima said: He rendered the children hopeful [mekavin] toward their Father in Heaven.6Thus, Yekutiel is interpreted to mean yekavu el El, they shall hope to God.  “Father of Zano’aḥ” (I Chronicles 4:18) – this is Moses, who was the father of those who cause abandonment [mazniḥim], who caused them to abandon idol worship. That is what is written: “[He took the calf which they had made, burnt it with fire, ground it to powder, and] scattered it over the water, [and he made the children of Israel drink from it]” (Exodus 32:20). “These are the sons of Bitya daughter of Pharaoh” (I Chronicles 4:18) – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The Holy One blessed be He said to Bitya daughter of Pharaoh: ‘Moses was not your son, but you called him your son; you, too, are not My daughter, but I call you My daughter,’ as it is stated: “These are the sons of Bitya,” the daughter of God [bat Yah]. “Whom Mered took” (I Chronicles 4:18) – this is Caleb. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: One said: He rebelled [marad] against the counsel of the scouts, and she rebelled [mareda] against the counsel of her father; let the rebel come and take the rebel. One said: He rescued the flock,7Caleb rescued Israel by contradicting the report of the majority of the scouts and attempting to calm the Israelites. Had he not done so, their sin would have been even worse.  and she rescued the shepherd. Moses was called ten names: Yered, Ḥever, Yekutiel, Avi Gedor, Avi Sokho, Avi Zano’aḥ.8Literally, father of Gedor, father of Sokho, father of Zano’aḥ.  Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai said: Toviya is also his name. That is what is written: “She saw him that he was good [tov]” (Exodus 2:2) – that he was Toviya. Rabbi Yishmael bar Ami said: Shemaya is also his name. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya came and explained this verse: “Shemaya son of Netanel the scribe [from the Levites] recorded them [before the king, the princes, Tzadok the priest, Aḥimelekh son of Evyatar, and the heads of the patrilineal houses of the priests and of the Levites]” (I Chronicles 24:6): “Shemaya” – because the Lord heard [shama Yah] his prayer. “Son of Netanel” – a son to whom the Torah was given [shenitena] from hand to hand. “The scribe” – because he was the scribe of Israel. “Levite” – because he was from the tribe of Levi. “Before the king and the princes” – before the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, and [before] His court. “Tzadok” – this is Aaron the priest. “Aḥimelekh” – because he was the brother [aḥ] of the king [melekh]. “Son of Evyatar” – because through him, the Holy One blessed be He overlooked [viter] for them the incident of the calf.9The midrash (Vayikra Rabba 10:3) asserts that Aaron’s involvement in the sin of the Golden Calf was undertaken so that the masses would not be directly involved, and that had they done so, their sin could not have been forgiven.  Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa: Levite was also his name after the forebear of his family: “Is not Aaron the Levite your brother?” (Exodus 4:14).10Just as Aaron was called Levite after the founder of the tribe, Moses could also be called Levite (Etz Yosef).  And Moses, that is ten. The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: As you live, from all the names that you were called, I will call you only by the name that Bitya daughter of Pharaoh called you: “She called his name Moses” (Exodus 2:10). “He called to Moses.”
Rabbi Avin began in the name of Rabbi Berekhya the Elder: “You then spoke in a vision to Your pious ones, [saying: I aided the mighty one; I raised the one chosen from the people]” (Psalms 89:20) – this is speaking of Abraham, to whom He spoke with speech and in vision. That is what is written: “After these matters, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying” (Genesis 15:1). “To Your pious ones [laḥasidekha]” – “give truth to Jacob, kindness [ḥesed] to Abraham” (Micah 7:20). “Saying: I aided the mighty one” – as he killed four kings in one night. That is what is written: “He deployed against them at night…[and smote them and pursued them until Ḥova]” (Genesis 14:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Do you have a person who pursues the dead, as it is stated: “And smote them and pursued them until Ḥova”? Rather, it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He was killing and Abraham was pursuing. “I raised the one chosen from the people” – this is Abraham, who was chosen by the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “Who has chosen Abram” (Nehemiah 9:7).  Another matter: “You then spoke in a vision to Your pious ones” (Psalms 89:20) – this is speaking of David, to whom He spoke with speech and in vision. That is what is written: “In accordance with all these matters, and in accordance with this entire vision, so Natan spoke to David” (II Samuel 7:17). “To Your pious ones [laḥasidekha]” – as it is stated: “Protect my soul, for I am pious [ḥasid]” (Psalms 86:2). “Saying: I aided the mighty one” (Psalms 89:20) – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: David waged thirteen wars, and the Rabbis say: Eighteen, and they do not disagree. The one who said thirteen, they were for the needs of Israel. The one who said eighteen, they were five for his own needs and thirteen for the needs of Israel. “I raised the one chosen from the people” (Psalms 89:20) – as it is stated: “He chose David His servant…” (Psalms 78:70). Another matter: “You then spoke in a vision” (Psalms 89:20) – this is speaking of Moses, to whom He spoke with speech and in vision, as it is stated: “Mouth to mouth I will speak to him, [and a vision]” (Numbers 12:8). “To Your pious ones” (Psalms 89:20) – because he was from the tribe of Levi, as it is stated: “Your Tummim and Your Urim for Your pious one” (Deuteronomy 33:8). “Saying: I aided the mighty one” (Psalms 89:20) – this accords with that which Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai said: The way of the world is that a burden that is difficult for one is easy for two; [one that is difficult] for two is easy for four. But can a burden that is difficult for six hundred thousand be easy for one? All of Israel was standing before Mount Sinai and saying: “If we continue to hear [the voice of the Lord our God any more, we will die]” (Deuteronomy 5:22), and Moses was hearing the voice of the divine speech himself, and he lived. Know that it is so, as from all of them, the divine speech called only to Moses, as it is stated: “He called to Moses.” “I raised the one chosen from the people” (Psalms 89:20) – as it is stated: “Were it not for Moses His chosen one” (Psalms 106:23).
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin interpreted the verse in the name of Rabbi Levi: “As it is better that it should be said to you: Come up here, than that you be demeaned before a prince…” (Proverbs 25:7). Rabbi Akiva taught it in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Azai: Distance yourself two or three seats from your rightful place and sit until they say to you, ascend. But do not ascend, as they will say to you, descend.11It was common for people to be seated according to their prominence. It would be better to take a less prominent seat and then be told to move up to a more prominent seat, than to take a more prominent seat and risk being told to move down to a less prominent one.  It is preferable that they say to you, ascend, ascend, and that they not say to you, descend, descend. Likewise, Hillel says: My lowering is my elevation; my elevation is my lowering. What is the source? “Who sits on High, who looks down to see” (Psalms 113:5–6). You find that when the Holy One blessed be He revealed Himself to Moses from the midst of the bush, he concealed his face from Him, as it is stated: “Moses concealed his face…” (Exodus 3:6). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Go [lekha], and I will send you to Pharaoh, [and you will bring My people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt]” (Exodus 3:10). Rabbi Elazar said: There is a heh at the end of the word, to say that if you do not redeem them, no one else will redeem them.12Instead of the standard usage, lekh, meaning go, God said lekha, which can also mean “for you.” This was meant to indicate that Moses was the only one who could have fulfilled this mission.  At the sea, he stood off to the side. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “You, raise your staff…and split it” (Exodus 14:16), to say that if you do not split it no one else will split it.13Instead of saying just: Raise your staff…, God prefaced the command with the word “you,” meaning, you alone can do it. At Sinai, he stood off to the side. [God] said to him: “Ascend to God, [you]” (Exodus 24:1), to say that if you do not ascend, no one else will ascend. At the Tent of Meeting, he stood off to the side. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: Until when will you lower yourself? The hour is awaiting only you. Know that it is so, as from all of them, the divine speech called only to Moses: “He called to Moses.”
Rabbi Tanḥuma began: “There is gold, and an abundance of gems, but lips of knowledge are a precious vessel” (Proverbs 20:15) – the way of the world is that a person who has gold, silver, jewels, gems, and all the objects of desire in the world, but he does not have goodness and wisdom, what acquisition does he have? The parable says: If you acquired knowledge what do you lack; if you lack knowledge, what have you acquired? “There is gold” – everyone brought his gift of gold to the Tabernacle. That is what is written: “This is the gift [you shall take from them: gold]” (Exodus 25:3). “An abundance of gems” – this is the gift of the princes, as it is stated: “The princes brought [the onyx stones and the stones for setting for the ephod and for the breast piece]” (Exodus 35:27). “But lips of knowledge are a precious vessel” – Moses’s soul was despondent, and he said: Everyone brought his gift offering for the Tabernacle, but I did not bring; so the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, your speech is dearer to me than all of it,’ as from all of them, the divine speech called only to Moses: “He called to Moses.”
Another matter: “He called to Moses” – what is written previous to this matter? It is the portion of the Tabernacle, “as the Lord commanded Moses.”14This phrase appears frequently in Exodus chapter 39, the passage describing the construction of the Tabernacle (see, e.g., Exodus 39:1, 7, 21).  This is analogous to a king who commanded his servant and said to him: ‘Build me a palace.’ On each and every item that he built, he would write the king’s name. He would build walls and write the king’s name on them. He would put up pillars and write the king’s name on them. He would install the ceiling beams and write the king’s name on them. Sometime later, the king entered the palace. On each and every item at which he would look, he would find his name written on it. He said: My servant accorded me all this honor, and I am inside and he is outside? He called him so that he would enter into its innermost chambers. So too, when the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Craft Me a Tabernacle,’ regarding each and every item he would construct, he would write: “As the Lord commanded Moses.” The Holy One blessed be He said: Moses accorded Me all this honor, and I am inside and he is outside? That is why it is stated: “He called to Moses.
Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Natan: Eighteen commands are written in the portion of the Tabernacle,15The phrase “as the Lord commanded Moses” appears eighteen times in Exodus chapter 39.  corresponding to the eighteen vertebrae in the spine. Corresponding to them, the Sages instituted the eighteen blessings in the Amida prayer, corresponding [also] to the eighteen mentions of God’s name in the recitation of Shema, and corresponding to the eighteen mentions of God’s name in: “Give to the Lord, sons of the mighty” (Psalms 29:1). Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Only from “With him was Oholiav son of Aḥisamakh, of the tribe of Dan” (Exodus 38:23) until the end of the book.16The eighteen mentions of God’s commands begin from Exodus 38:23. They do not include Exodus 38:22, which states: “Betzalel, son of Uri, son of Ḥur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the Lord commanded Moses.”  This is analogous to a king who entered a city and with him were commanders, governors, and generals, and the people did not know which was most beloved of them all. The one to whom the king turns and speaks is the most beloved of them all. So too, “To Moses, He said: Ascend [to the Lord,] you and Aaron, Nadav and Avihu and seventy of the elders of Israel” (Exodus 24:1), but we do not know which of them was the most beloved of them all. It is, rather, the one whom the Holy One blessed be He calls and speaks with him. That is why it is stated: “He called to Moses.” This is analogous to a king who enters a city. With whom does he speak first? Is it not with the overseer of the city’s food markets? Why? Because he is occupied with the sustenance of the city. So too, Moses was occupied with the burdens of Israel. He said to them: ‘This animal you may eat, and that one you may not eat’: “This you shall eat from all that is in the water…” (Leviticus 11:9); “these you shall abominate from the birds” (Leviticus 11:13) – abominate these, do not abominate those; “this is impure to you” (Leviticus 11:29) – this is impure, that is not impure. That is why it is stated: “He called to Moses.”
“He called to Moses” – did He not call to Adam?17The verse “He called to Moses” is understood to imply something unique about Moses, that God called to him without Moses actively seeking or preparing for prophecy. However, the Torah indicates that God similarly called out to Adam (Etz Yosef).  Is it not already stated: “The Lord God called to the man” (Genesis 3:9)? Rather, there is no disgrace in a king speaking to his sharecropper.18Adam is compared to God’s sharecropper, because the verse states that God placed Adam in the Garden of Eden “to cultivate it and to safeguard it” (Genesis 2:15).  “The Lord spoke to him” – did He not speak with Noah? Is it not already stated: “God spoke to Noah” (Genesis 8:15)? Rather, there is no disgrace in a king speaking to his shepherd. “He called to Moses” – did He not call to Abraham? Is it not already stated: “The angel of the Lord called to Abraham” (Genesis 22:15)? Rather, there is no disgrace in a king speaking to his innkeeper. “He called to Moses” – unlike Abraham. Regarding Abraham it is written: “The angel of the Lord called to Abraham” (Genesis 22:15) – the angel called, and the divine speech spoke. However, here, Rabbi Avin said: The Holy One blessed be He said: It is I who calls, and it is I who speaks, as it is stated: “I, it is I, who has spoken, I also have called him; I brought him, and his way is successful” (Isaiah 48:15).
“From the Tent of Meeting” – although the Torah was given as a fence from Sinai,19Some interpret this to mean that although the Israelites could not yet fully observe the commandments because they had not yet been explained, the very fact that the commandments had been given served to distinguish them and elevate them from the nations of the world, much like a fence marks off a given area (Etz Yosef).  they were punished for [violating] it only after it was repeated at the Tent of Meeting. This is analogous to a writ of decree that was written and sealed, and it entered the province. The residents of the province will not be punished on its account until it is explained to them in the province’s public forum. So too, although the Torah was given to Israel in Sinai, they were punished for it only after it was repeated to them at the Tent of Meeting. That is what is written: “Until I brought him to my mother's house, and to the chamber of the one who conceived me” (Song of Songs 3:4). “To my mother's house” – this is Sinai. “And to the chamber of the one who conceived me” – this is the Tent of Meeting, as it was from there that Israel was commanded regarding the Torah’s rulings.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Had the nations of the world known how beneficial the Tent of Meeting was for them, they would have surrounded it with encampments and fortifications. You find that until the Tabernacle was erected, the nations of the world would hear the sound of the divine speech and would be afflicted with diarrhea in their palaces.20The point is that the divine speech was so overpowering that those who heard it would lose control of their physical faculties.  That is what is written: “For who of all flesh that heard the voice of the living God [speaking from the midst of the fire like us, has lived?]” (Deuteronomy 5:23). Rabbi Simon said: The speech would emerge with two natures, as an elixir of life for Israel and an elixir of death for the nations of the world. That is what is written: “[Has a people heard the voice of God…] as you heard, and lived?” (Deuteronomy 4:33). You heard and lived, but the nations of the world would hear and die. Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: “[The Lord spoke to him] from the Tent of Meeting” – this teaches that the voice would stop and would not emerge outside the Tent of Meeting.
Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Until the Tabernacle was erected, prophecy was found among the nations of the world. When the Tabernacle was erected, it departed from their midst, as it is stated: “[When I found the one whom my soul loves,] I grasped him and would not release him” (Song of Songs 3:4). They said to him: But Bilam prophesied. He said to them: He prophesied for the benefit of Israel: “Who has counted the dust of Jacob” (Numbers 23:10); “One has seen no evil in Jacob” (Numbers 23:21); “For there is no divination in Jacob” (Numbers 23:23); “How goodly are your tents, Jacob” (Numbers 24:5); “a star rises from Jacob” (Numbers 24:17); “One from Jacob shall rule” (Numbers 24:19).
What is the difference between prophets of Israel and prophets of the nations of the world? Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina and Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi: Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the nations of the world with only truncated speech, just as it says: “God happened [vayikar] upon Bilam” (Numbers 23:4). But [He communicates with] the prophets of Israel with complete speech, as it is stated: “He called [vayikra] to Moses.” Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi said: So shall be their reward. Vayikar is an expression of nothing other than impurity, just as it says: “Who will not be pure due to a nocturnal incident [mikreh]” (Deuteronomy 23:11). But the prophets of Israel [receive prophecy] with an expression of sanctity, with an expression of purity, with an expression of clarity, with an expression with which the ministering angels laud the Holy One blessed be He, just as it says: “One called [vekara] to the other and said: [Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts]” (Isaiah 6:3). Rabbi Ilai bar Menaḥem said: It is written: “The Lord is far from the wicked” (Proverbs 15:29), and it is written: “And He hears the prayer of the righteous” (Proverbs 15:29). “The Lord is far from the wicked” – these are the prophets of the nations of the world. “And He hears the prayer of the righteous” – these are the prophets of Israel. You find that the Holy One blessed be He appears to the nations of the world only like a man who came from a distance, just as it says: “From a distant land they came to me” (Isaiah 39:3). But the prophets of Israel, immediately: “[The Lord] appeared” (Genesis 18:1), “He called.”21God appears to the prophets of Israel immediately, whereas regarding prophecies to individuals from other nations the verse first states that God came to them, and only then states that he spoke with them. See Genesis 20:3, 31:24, and Numbers 22:20 (Rabbi David Luria).  Rabbi Yosei said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the nations of the world only at night, at a time when people are separated from one another, as it is written: “In thoughts from visions of the night, [when slumber] falls” (Job 4:13), “a matter was smuggled to me…” (Job 4:12). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and the Rabbis: Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: This is analogous to a king who was in a hall with his friend and there was a curtain between them. When he would speak with his friend, he would fold the curtain until he could see his friend face-to-face and speak with him. But for others, he would not do so; rather, he would speak to them with the curtain partition spread between them, and they could not see him. The Rabbis say: This is analogous to a king who had a wife and a concubine. When he would go to his wife, he would go in public, and when he would go to his concubine he would go clandestinely. So too, the Holy One blessed be He appears to the nations of the world only at night, as it is stated: “God came to Avimelekh in a nocturnal dream” (Genesis 20:3); “God came to Laban the Aramean in a nocturnal dream” (Genesis 31:24); “God came to Bilam at night” (Numbers 22:20). But [God appears] to the prophets of Israel by day, as it is stated: “[The Lord appeared to him…] and he was sitting at the entrance of his tent in the heat of the day” (Genesis 18:1); “it was on the day the Lord spoke to Moses” (Exodus 6:28); “this is the legacy of Aaron and Moses on the day the Lord spoke to Moses…” (Numbers 3:1).
What is the difference between Moses and all the [other] prophets? Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai and the Rabbis: Rabbi Yehuda says: The prophets would see through nine looking glasses. That is what is written: “The appearance of the vision that I saw [was like the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the Kevar River]” (Ezekiel 43:3).22The words appearance, vision, and saw appear a total of eight times, and in one of those instances the word visions appears in plural, for a total of nine. This alludes to the fact that the prophet saw his prophecy as though looking through nine layers of glass.  Moses saw through one looking glass, as it is stated: “And a vision and not in riddles” (Numbers 12:8). The Rabbis said: All the prophets saw through a murky looking glass. That is what is written: “[I spoke to the prophets;] I proliferated visions and granted imagery to the prophets” (Hosea 12:11). Moses saw through a polished looking glass. That is what is written: “And a vision and not in riddles” (Numbers 12:8). Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: This is analogous to a king who revealed himself to a member of his household in his image.23He allowed him to see the king without any intervening curtains.  In this world, the Divine Presence appears only to individuals, but in the future: “The glory of the Lord will be revealed, and all flesh will see together that the mouth of the Lord has spoken” (Isaiah 40:5).
Another matter: “He called to Moses, and the Lord spoke” – from here they said: Any Torah scholar who lacks sense, a carcass is better than he is. Know that it is so, and learn it from Moses, the father of wisdom, the father of the prophets, who took Israel out of Egypt. Through him numerous miracles were performed in Egypt and awe-inspiring acts at the Red Sea; he ascended to the heavens on High, brought down the Torah from heaven, engaged in the labor of the Tabernacle; but he did not enter into the innermost chambers24The Holy of Holies.  until He called him, as it is stated: “He called to Moses, and [the Lord] spoke.” Elsewhere it is stated: “The Lord saw that he turned to see; [God called to him from the midst of the bush, and He said: Moses, Moses]” (Exodus 3:4). At the bush, there was an interruption between the call and the speech. In the Tent of Meeting there is no interruption. At the bush, to what is the matter comparable? To a king of flesh and blood who became angry at his servant and commanded that he be incarcerated in prison. When he commands the emissary [to free him], he commands him only outside.25He commands the emissary from afar, rather than calling the emissary in to him, because the incarcerated individual is not dear to the king. Similarly, Israel was incarcerated in Egypt, and God spoke to Moses from a distance.  But in the Tent of Meeting [it is comparable to a king] when he rejoices in his children, and the members of his household are joyful. When He commands the emissary [regarding his children], he commands him only inside, as one who sits him between his knees, as a person would with his son. That is why it is stated: “He called to Moses [and the Lord spoke to him].”

Section: Numbers_Rabbah
“The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first of the second month, in the second year of their exodus from the land of Egypt, saying” (Numbers 1:1). “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – that is what the verse said: “[Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains]; Your justice is like the great depths” (Psalms 36:7).1“Great depths” refers to punishment of the wicked. Rabbi Meir said: It is analogized to the righteous in their abode, and it is analogized to the wicked in their abode. It is analogized to the righteous in their abode: “In a good pasture I will herd them, and on the mountains of the height of Israel will be their grazing place” (Ezekiel 34:14). It is analogized to the wicked in their abode: “So said the Lord God: On the day that it descended to the grave I caused mourning; I covered the depths for it” (Ezekiel 31:15). With what are the wicked covered when they descend to the grave? It is with the depths.  Ḥizkiya bar Rabbi Ḥiyya said: This vat, with what does one cover it? It is with an earthenware vessel, what it is from; just as it is from earthenware, so one covers it with earthenware. So it is with the wicked. What is written in their regard? “Their actions are in the dark, and they say: Who sees us and who knows of us?” (Isaiah 29:15). Because [their actions] are dark, the Holy One blessed be He sends them down to the grave, which is dark, and covers them with the depths that are dark, as it is stated: “And darkness upon the surface of the depths” (Genesis 1:2). That is, “Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains” – the righteousness that you bring upon the world is as conspicuous as these mountains. “Your justice is like the great depths” – the justice that You perform in this world; “the great depths” – just as the depths are concealed, so the justice that you effect is concealed. How so? When Jerusalem was destroyed, it was destroyed on the ninth of Av. When He shows it to Ezekiel, He shows it to him on the first of the month.2The prophecy in Ezekiel 26:1–2 references the destruction of Jerusalem. The date the midrash gives is the first day of the month, but it does not mention which month. The midrash is stating that God showed the Destruction to Ezekiel on a different day than it actually occurred. Why? It was so as not to reveal on which day it was destroyed. However, when He comes to exalt Israel, he reveals: which day, which place, which month, which year, which era: “[The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first of the second month, in the second year] of their exodus from the land of Egypt, saying” (Numbers 1:1). What did He say to them? “Take a census of the entire congregation of the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:2).
Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – that is what the verse said: “You, the generation, see the word of the Lord: Have I been a wilderness for Israel or a land of deep darkness?…” (Jeremiah 2:31). The Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: ‘Because you said to Moses: “Why did you take us up from Egypt to die in the wilderness?” (Numbers 21:5). Was I like a wilderness for Israel; did I act with them like in the wilderness? The way of the world is that a king of flesh and blood who goes out to the wilderness, does he find tranquility there as he would find it in the palace, or eating or drinking? You were slaves in Egypt and I took you out of there; I lay you down on fine beds,’ as it is stated: “God led the people roundabout [vayasev] via the wilderness” (Exodus 13:18). What is vayasev?1 This root can also mean to recline on a bed. The midrash interprets vayasev as a verb meaning that he caused them to recline. It is that he lay them down in the manner of kings, recumbent upon their beds. Did I not place three caretakers for them: Moses, Aaron, and Miriam? Due to the merit of Moses you would eat the manna that the holy fathers did not see, as it is stated: “He fed you the manna that you did not know, and your fathers did not know” (Deuteronomy 8:3). Due to the merit of Aaron, I surrounded you with the clouds of glory, as it is stated: “He spread a cloud like a curtain” (Psalms 105:39).  How many clouds of glory surrounded Israel in the wilderness? Rabbi Hoshaya and Rabbi Yoshiya: Rabbi Yoshiya said: Five; four in the four directions, and one going before them. Rabbi Hoshaya said: Seven; four in the four directions of the heavens, one above them, one below them, and one going before them at a distance of three days, and it would strike the snakes, the scorpions, the serpents, and the boulders before them. If there was a low place, it would elevate it; if it was an elevated place, it would lower it and render it a plain, as it is stated: “Every valley will be elevated, and every mountain and hill will be lowered” (Isaiah 40:4). The well was due to the merit of Miriam, who recited song at the sea, as it is stated: “Miriam called to them: Sing to the Lord” (Exodus 15:21), and regarding the water of the well: Then Israel sang this song” (Numbers 21:17). Rabbi Berekhya HaKohen said in the name of Rabbi Levi: A king of flesh and blood who has a province and he dispatched prominent people into it to conduct their affairs and administer their justice, who must be responsible for their sustenance? Is it not the residents of that province who must be responsible for them? But the Holy One blessed be He did not do so. Rather, he dispatched Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as it is stated: “I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.” (Micah 6:4), and yet, it was due to their merit that [the people] were sustained. The manna was due to the merit of Moses. Know that it is due to the merit of Moses; when Moses departed, “The manna ceased on the following day” (Joshua 5:12). The clouds of glory were due to the merit of Aaron. From where do we derive it? When Aaron departed, what is written: “The spirit of the people became restive on the way” (Numbers 21:4), as the sun was beating down on them. The well was due to the merit of Miriam. What is written? “Miriam died there and was buried there” (Numbers 20:1). What is written thereafter? “There was no water for the congregation” (Numbers 20:2). Of what was the well constituted? It was a boulder. It was like a beehive, and it would roll and come with them on their journeys. When the banners would encamp and the Tabernacle would stand, that boulder would come and settle in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting. The princes would stand over it and say: “Rise, well” (Numbers 21:17). Then I brought you the quails. “Have I been a wilderness for Israel” (Jeremiah 2:31) – did I conduct myself with you like a wilderness? Or was I “a land of deep darkness” (Jeremiah 2:31) – was it not I, by My own hand that I illuminated for you, as it is stated: “The Lord was going before them by day…[to illuminate for them]” (Exodus 13:21). Another matter: “Or a land of mapelya” (Jeremiah 2:31) – what is mapelya? Did I, perhaps, say to you that I am bringing good for you and I delayed it? Mapelya is nothing other than delay, as it is states: “But the wheat and the spelt were not struck, as they ripen late [afilot]” (Exodus 9:32).2The "p" in mapelya and the "f" in afilot represent the same Hebrew letter. No matter that the Holy One blessed be He said to Israel was lacking, as Joshua said: “Nothing of all the good things that the Lord spoke to the house of Israel was lacking; everything came about” (Joshua 21:43). “Why did My people say: We separated from You [radnu]; [we will not come to You any longer]?” (Jeremiah 2:31) – what is radnu? It is the language of the Mishna: One who removes [harodeh] hot bread.3Terumot 10:3. Israel said: When the bread is baked in the oven and removed from it, can it be affixed in the oven again? We were in His hand like in an oven, as it is stated: “An oven for Him in Jerusalem” (Isaiah 31:9), and He exiled us to Babylon. What more can He ask from us?4After the exile there were those who said that just as the baked bread cannot be returned to the oven, so too the exiled Israelites cannot be reconnected to God (Maharzu).  Another matter: “Why did My people say: We separated from You [radnu]; we will not come to You any longer?” (Jeremiah 2:31) – what is radnu? It is just as it says: “For he ruled [rodeh] the entire region beyond the river” (I Kings 5:4). They said to Him: ‘You smashed the Temple, removed Your Divine Presence from us. What do you want from us? “We will not come to You any longer.”’ He said to them: ‘If only I were in the wilderness now. Where are all the miracles that I performed on your behalf?’ Likewise He says: “Would that I would be in the wilderness, in a wayfarers’ lodge, and I would leave my people…” (Jeremiah 9:11), where I would be lauded, as it is stated: “Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice, the villages that Kedar inhabits; rock dwellers will sing” (Isaiah 42:11). This is analogous to a prince who entered a province, and the residents of the province saw him and fled. He entered the second, and they fled from before him. He entered a city in ruins, and they greeted him and were lauding him. The prince said: This city is better than all the provinces. Here I will build a fine throne; here I will reside. So, when the Holy One blessed be He came to the sea, it fled from before Him, as it is stated: “The sea saw and fled” (Psalms 114:3), and likewise, “the mountains danced like rams” (Psalms 114:4). He came to the desolate wilderness; it greeted Him and lauded Him, as it is stated: “Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice, with courtyards inhabited by Kedar; rock dwellers will sing.” He said: This city is better for Me than all the provinces. In it, I will build an inn and reside within it. They began rejoicing that the Holy One blessed be He resides in it, as it is stated: “Wilderness and wasteland will be glad, [and the desert shall rejoice]” (Isaiah 35:1).
Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – Before the Tent of Meeting stood, He spoke with him at the bush, as it is stated: “God called to him from within the bush” (Exodus 3:4). Then, “God said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying.” (Exodus 12:1) He spoke with him in Midian, as it is stated: “The Lord spoke to Moses in Midian” (Exodus 4:19). He spoke to him in Sinai, as it is stated: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai…saying.” Once the Tent of Meeting stood, He said: Modesty [tzeniut] is preferable, as it is stated: “And to walk humbly [hatzne’a] with your God” (Micah 6:8) – He speaks with him in the Tent of Meeting. Likewise, David said: “All of the glory of a king’s daughter is within, her dress interwoven with gold” (Psalms 45:14). “A king’s daughter” – this is Moses, as it is stated: “I will deliver Egypt into the hand of a harsh master” (Isaiah 19:4) – these are the plagues that came upon Egypt. “And a strong [oz] king will rule over them” (Isaiah 19:4) – this is Moses, who was the king of the Torah, which is called oz, as it is stated: “The Lord will give strength [oz] to His people” (Psalms 29:11). Therefore, “all of the glory of a king’s daughter is within.”5Thus, the verse that implies that modesty is appropriate for the king's daughter refers to Moses, to whom God spoke from within the Tent of Meeting. “[All of the glory [kevudah] of a king’s daughter is within,] her dress interwoven [mimishbetzot] with gold” – this is Aaron, as it is stated: “You shall make settings [mishbetzot] of gold” (Exodus 28:13). From here they said: A woman who conducts herself modestly, even if she is an Israelite, is worthy to marry a priest and to produce High Priests, as it is stated: “Her dress interwoven [mimishbetzot] with gold.” The Holy One blessed be He said: This is My honor [kavod], that I will speak within. As it is stated: “When Moses went into the Tent of Meeting [to speak with Him]” (Numbers 7:89). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: If the nations of the world would know how much the Temple benefited them, they would have surrounded it with fortifications to protect it, as it was more beneficial for them than it was for Israel, as Solomon prayed: “To the foreigner, as well, who is not of Your people Israel” (I Kings 8:41), and it is written: “You will act in accordance with everything that the foreigner calls to You” (I Kings 8:43). But when he comes to Israel, what is written? “May You grant to each man according to all his ways, as you know his heart” (II Chronicles 6:30) – if he was worthy of it, He would give to him; if not, He would not give to him. Do not say: The Temple [alone benefits all nations]; rather, were it not for Israel, rain would not fall, the sun would not shine, as it is due to their merit that the Holy One blessed be He brings wellbeing to the world. In the World to Come, the nations of the world will see Israel, how the Holy One blessed be He is with them, and they will come to cleave to them, as it is stated: “[So said the Lord of hosts:] In those days, ten men of all the languages of the nations will take hold; [they will take hold of the corner of the garment of a Judean man, saying: Let us go with you, as we have heard that God is with you]” (Zechariah 8:23).
Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – that is what the verse said: “Your navel is a moon-shaped goblet” (Song of Songs 7:3); it is speaking of the Sanhedrin that was situated in the Chamber of Hewn Stone and is analogized to the navel. Why is it analogized to the navel? It is, that just as this navel is situated in the middle of the body, so, the Sanhedrin is situated in the middle of the Temple. “May it not lack blended wine [al yeḥsar hamazeg]” (Song of Songs 7:3) – what is “al yeḥsar hamazeg”? That there were never less than one-third of them. “Al yeḥsar hamazeg” – one who dilutes [mozeg] properly, dilutes with one-third of the cup wine and two parts water. So, the Sanhedrin would convene there from the daily morning offering until the daily afternoon offering, and no one of them would leave to tend to his own affairs. What would they do if one of them sought to leave? He would count; if there were twenty-three there, he would leave, if not, he would not leave.6The Sanhedrin had seventy members. Twenty-three is just under one third. Why? It is because it is written: “May it not lack blended wine [al yeḥsar hamazeg]” that one-third of them were never missing. Therefore, al yeḥsar hamazeg. “Your belly is a pile of wheat” (Song of Songs 7:3) – Israel was likened to a pile of wheat; just as this wheat enters the storehouse by number, so, the Holy One blessed be He said that Israel should be counted at all times.7This is a sign of importance. That is why it is stated: “Your belly is a pile of wheat.” But straw and stubble are not counted and not measured; so, the nations of the world were likened to straw and stubble, as it is stated: “Like stubble before the wind” (Psalms 83:14), and likewise: “The house of Esau to stubble” (Obadiah 1:18). Why? It is because the Holy One blessed be He derives no pleasure from them, as it is stated: “All the nations are as nothing before Him” (Isaiah 40:17). But Israel, the Holy One blessed be He derives pleasure from them; they recite Shema, pray, and bless the name of the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, every day. That is why they are counted at all times and that is why they were likened to wheat. “Your belly is a pile of wheat.”
“The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – this is what the verse said: “He did not do so for every nation” (Psalms 147:20), and likewise: “He raised a horn for His people” (Psalms 148:14). This is analogous to a king who took a first wife and did not write her a marriage contract, divorced her, and did not write her a bill of divorce, and so to the second and to the third; he did not write them a marriage contract and not a bill of divorce. What, then, did he do? He saw a young orphan girl, well born, and he sought to take her as a wife. He said to his groomsman: ‘Do not act with her like with the first ones; she is well born, modest, and upright. Write her a marriage contract, [specifying] in which seven-year period, in which year, in which month, in which district,’ just as it is written regarding Esther: “Esther was taken to King Aḥashverosh, to his royal palace, in the tenth month, which is the month of Tevet, in the seventh year of his reign” (Esther 2:16). So, the Holy One blessed be He created the generation of the Flood, but He did not write when He created them. He eliminated them from the world, and did not write when He eliminated them, but only, “On that day all the wellsprings of the great depth were breached” (Genesis 7:11). Likewise, regarding the generation of the Dispersion and likewise regarding Egypt, He did not write when they were created and when they died. But when Israel stood, the Holy One blessed be He said: I will not act with these like those first ones. These are the descendants of the patriarchs, the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Go, write for them which month, how many days in the month, which year, which district, and in which city I raised their horn. “In the Tent of Meeting" – that is the district; “in the second year” – that is the year; “of the second month” – that is the month; “on the first of the month” – that is how many days into the month. The era was also written.8The era was, “of their exodus from the land of Egypt.” Why “take a census of the entire congregation of the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:2)? To realize what is stated: “He did not do so for every nation.” What did He do? “He raised a horn for His people” (Psalms 148:14).
“The Lord spoke to Moses” – happy is Moses that six hundred thousand were standing; the priests, the Levites, and the elders were all standing there, and from all of them He spoke only with Moses.
“The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – why in the wilderness of Sinai? From here the Sages taught that the Torah was given with three elements: With fire, with water, and in the wilderness. With fire, from where is it derived? “Mount Sinai was all smoke, [because the Lord had descended upon it in fire]” (Exodus 19:18). In water, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Indeed, the heavens dripped, indeed, the clouds dripped water” (Judges 5:4).9The verse is a reference to the giving of the Torah. In the wilderness, from where is it derived? “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai.” Why was it given with these three elements? It is, that just as these are free for all mankind, so, matters of Torah are free, as it is stated: “Ho, everyone who is thirsty go to water” (Isaiah 55:1).10“Incline your ear and go to Me; take heed and your soul will live” (Isaiah 55:3), a reference to Torah, is written two verses later. Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – it is, that anyone who does not render himself like a wilderness, accessible to all, is unable to acquire wisdom and the Torah. That is why it is stated: “In the wilderness of Sinai.”
Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – it was called six names: The mountain of God, Mount Bashan, Mount Gavnunim, Mount Moriah11From the continuation of the midrash it is clear that Mount Ḥamad should appear in the text rather than Mount Moriah., Mount Ḥorev, Mount Sinai. The mountain of God, because God sat there in judgment, as it is stated: “These are the ordinances [mishpatim]” (Exodus 21:1).12Mishpat can also mean judgment. Mount Bashan, as the Holy One blessed be He came there [ba sham]. Mount Gavnunim, the mountain that disqualified all the mountains, just as it says: “Or a hunchback [giben] or a dwarf [.… shall not approach to sacrifice the offerings of the Lord]” (Leviticus 21:20–21). Mount Ḥamad, because the Holy One blessed be He desired [ḥamad] to abide there, as it is stated: “The mountain that God desired for His abode” (Psalms 68:17). Mount Ḥorev, because a sword [ḥerev] was wielded upon it, as it is stated: “The adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death” (Leviticus 20:10); the murderer shall be put to death” (Numbers 35:16).13Verses 17–18 contain this command as well. Mount Sinai, where the nations of the world became hated [nisne’u] to the Holy One blessed be He, and he issued a death sentence against them, as it is stated: “The nations will be entirely destroyed [ḥarov yeḥeravu]” (Isaiah 60:12). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: The nations will be destroyed from Ḥorev, as they received their death sentence.
Another matter: “The Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai” – He said to him: “Take a census [se’u et rosh]” (Numbers 1:2). The Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: I was not fond of any creature more than you; therefore I accorded you preeminence [telui rosh] and likened you to Me. Just as I have preeminence over all mankind, as it is stated: “Yours, Lord, is the greatness […and the preeminence over every head [vehamitnaseh lekhol lerosh]]” (I Chronicles 29:11), so, I accorded you preeminence. That is why it is stated: Se’u et rosh, to realize what is stated: “He raised a horn for His people” (Psalms 148:14). Likewise it says: “The Lord your God will place you uppermost over all the nations of the earth” (Deuteronomy 28:1).
“All those counted were six hundred three thousand, five hundred and fifty” (Numbers 1:46). “All those counted were six hundred [three] thousand [five hundred and fifty]” – you find that this census equals the census in which Israel was counted in the construction of the Tabernacle, as it is stated: “The silver of those who were counted of the congregation [was one hundred talents and one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels, in the sacred shekel]” (Exodus 38:25).14A calculation of the number of half-shekels yields 603,550 people. That was in the first year, as when they received the Ten Commandments, Moses immediately ascended to receive the Tablets, they sinned with the act of the calf, and immediately they crafted the Tabernacle and it was erected on the first of Nisan in the second year, as it is stated: “It was in the first month during the second year, on the first of the month, that the Tabernacle was erected” (Exodus 40:17). When was this census? It was on the first of Iyar in the second year, as it is stated: “They assembled the entire congregation [on the first of the second month…from twenty years old and above, by their head count]” (Numbers 1:18). In that census in which he counted them when Israel departed from Egypt on the fifteenth of Nisan, how many were they? “Six hundred thousand men on foot, besides children” (Exodus 12:37). When he came to count them in the second year on the first of the second month, he found that they were an additional three thousand five hundred and fifty, but we do not know [regarding] these additional ones whether he counts them as twenty from the New Moon of Nisan of the second year from their exodus from Egypt, or whether he counts them as twenty from the New Year, which is the New Moon of Tishrei, and it is the first year from their exodus from Egypt. Go out and learn from the bases,15Most of the silver collected from the half-shekel each person brought was used for the bases of the boards of wood which served as the walls of the Tabernacle. as it is stated: “The silver of those who were counted of the congregation was one hundred talents.… One beka per head, one-half shekel” (Exodus 38:25–26). When did they bring the shekels? It was on the day after Yom Kippur, and in two mornings they brought the entire contribution to the Tabernacle, as it is stated: “They brought him more contributions morning after morning” (Exodus 36:3). If you say that they did not count those who departed from Egypt less than twenty years old, [because] they did not count them [in the census of those over] twenty until the month of Nisan of the second year; if so, you find among the shekels a surplus of three thousand five hundred and fifty shekels. Rather, what must you say? It is that they counted them as twenty from Tishrei, which is the New Year for the creation of Adam the first man. This is why it presented the tally in this manner, to inform us that although they entered one month into the second year from their exodus from Egypt, those who reached twenty years were not added in their tally beyond those who contributed for the bases of the Tabernacle; to inform you that they do not count them from Nisan, but rather from Tishrei.
“But the Levites by the tribe of their fathers were not counted among them” (Numbers 1:47). “But the Levites by the tribe of their fathers” – the verse comes to say: Because the Holy One blessed be He did not say to Moses initially that he should count the tribe of Levi, as you find that he did not enumerate a prince for the tribe of Levi when he enumerated the princes of the tribes, Moses too did not count it, as Moses said: Had it been the will of the Holy One blessed be He that I count them, He would have told me. That is why it is stated: “But the Levites by the tribe of their fathers were not counted among them,” as he did not wish to count them. Immediately, Moses was standing and wondering why the Holy One blessed be He did not command him to count his tribe, and he did not know whether he would count them or not. The Holy One blessed be He saw that he was wondering; He immediately explained to him why he did not command him to count. That is what is written: “The Lord spoke.… However, the tribe of Levi you shall not count…” (Numbers 1:48–49). Rabbi Pinḥas bar Idi said: What is written at the beginning of the book? “Take a census [se’u et rosh] of the entire congregation of the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:2). It is not stated, “Elevate the head,” “promote the head,” but rather se’u et rosh,16Se’u et rosh literally means “lift up the head.” like a person who says to the executioner: Remove the head of so-and-so. He thereby made an allusion. Why se’u et rosh? If they merit they will ascend to greatness, just as it says: “Pharaoh will lift up your head and restore you to your position” (Genesis 40:13). If they do not merit, they will all die, just as it says: “Pharaoh will lift up your head from upon you, and hang you on a tree” (Genesis 40:19).  It was revealed before the Holy One blessed be He that they would all die in the wilderness, and their heads will be removed; therefore, the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: “However, the tribe of Levi [you shall not count…] among the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:49). Among the children of Israel you shall not count them, but by themselves, count them. Why? The Holy One blessed be He said: If the tribe of Levi is counted with Israel and intermingles with them, the angel of death will come to kill Israel and the decree will be issued against them that they will not enter the land, but rather, they will die in the wilderness, as it is stated: “In this wilderness, your carcasses will fall, and all those of you who were counted in any of your censuses” (Numbers 14:29), and he will find the tribe of Levi intermingled with them and they will intermingle with Israel to die. That is why he did not count them with Israel, but rather separated them in the tally. And that is also why the language that is written regarding Israel, se’u et rosh, was not stated in their regard, but rather: “Count [pekod] the children of Levi” (Numbers 3:15).
Another matter: “However, the tribe of Levi you shall not count” (Numbers 1:49) – why were they not counted with Israel? It is because the tribe of Levi was the palace guard. This is analogous to a king who had several legions, and he said to his chief of staff: Go count the legions, except for the legion that stands before me. That is why the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: “However, the tribe of Levi [you shall not count]…among the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:49). Among the children of Israel you shall not count them, but by themselves, count them, as it is not in keeping with the king’s honor that his legion should be counted with the legions. That is why Israel was counted by itself and the tribe of Levi was counted by itself. From where do you say that it is for that reason that He said it to him? It is because it is written thereafter: “And you, appoint the Levites over the Tabernacle of the Testimony…” (Numbers 1:50). When the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: “However, the tribe of Levi you shall not count…” (Numbers 1:49), Moses grew afraid and said: Is there perhaps a disqualification in my tribe, due to which the Holy One blessed be He does not wish me to count them? The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: I said so to you only to exclude them from the decree, so that they will not die with them. That is what is written: “And you shall not take a census of them [ve’et rosham lo tisa] among the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:49). Why? It is because the Levites are Mine: “The Levites shall be Mine” (Numbers 3:12, 45). As, anyone who draws Me near, I draw him near. They drew near to Me, as it is stated: “Moses…said: Whoever is for the Lord, come to me; and all the sons of Levi gathered to him” (Exodus 32:26). They drew Me near, and I draw them near: “The Levites shall be Mine.” Moreover, because they were found to be loyal to Me, as they observed my admonition: “You shall have no other gods…” (Exodus 20:3), therefore, they are worthy to be the trustees of My house. “And you, appoint the Levites [over the Tabernacle of the Testimony…and they shall encamp around the Tabernacle]” – likewise it says: “My eyes are on the faithful of the land; they will dwell with Me.” (Psalms 101:6). You find that anyone who is put to the test regarding a matter,17And he passes the test. the Holy One blessed be He loves him forever. As, you find regarding Joshua that he was put to the test with Amalek, and he performed there in accordance with the Torah and the mitzva, as it is stated: “Joshua weakened [Amalek and its people by sword]” (Exodus 17:13). The Omnipresent said to him: From your tribe, I will establish one who will exact retribution against Amalek forever: “From Ephraim came those who uprooted Amalek” (Judges 5:14). Saul, who was put to the test but did not properly fulfill his command, but rather: “Saul and the people spared [Agag…and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them]” (I Samuel 15:9), He caused him to fall back [le’aḥorav], and his kingdom was taken from him: “After you [aḥarekha], Benjamin” (Judges 5:14).  This tribe, too, I put them to the test, and they were found observant, and they gave their lives for sanctification of My name, as it is stated: “Each man, place his sword upon his thigh…[and each slay his brother, each his neighbor, each his relative]. The sons of Levi acted in accordance with the word of Moses…” (Exodus 32:27–28); “Who said of his father, and of his mother: [I did not see him, and his brothers he did not recognize, and his children he did not know, because they observed Your saying, and Your covenant they upheld]” (Deuteronomy 33:9). Here, too, I will draw them near and make them My palace guard, and I entrust My sanctity and the function of My house to them. That is what is written: “And you, appoint the Levites [over the Tabernacle of the Testimony]” (Numbers 1:50). Why? It is because they are loyal to Me. During its dismantling and its erecting, too, I do not want others to dismantle it and erect it, only them. That is what is written: “And when the Tabernacle travels, [the Levites shall dismantle it, and when the Tabernacle encamps, the Levites shall erect it]” (Numbers 1:51). Is it possible that the mitzva is incumbent upon the Levites, but if an Israelite did so it is permitted? The verse stated: “And the stranger who approaches shall be put to death” (Numbers 1:51). Likewise it says: I hate doers of perversity” (Psalms 101:3) – this is Israel that strayed from after the Omnipresent and crafted the calf, and the Holy One blessed be He despised them from being His trustees. Do not say that it was that Israel would not touch it [only] during the journeys, rather, also during the encampments, only the children of Levi would approach it. That is what is written: “The children of Israel shall encamp, each in his camp.… And the Levites shall encamp around the Tabernacle of the Testimony” (Numbers 1:52–53). Why do I caution them that Israel should distance themselves from the Tabernacle? It is so there would not be fury upon them, as they are unworthy to approach it. That is what is written: “And there will not be fury against the congregation of the children of Israel” (Numbers 1:53). But the Levites will protect it; that is what is written: “The Levites will protect the watch of the Tabernacle of the Testimony” (Numbers 1:53). “The children of Israel did according to everything that the Lord commanded Moses, so they did” (Numbers 1:54) – as they distanced themselves from the Tabernacle and provided room for the Levites to encamp around the Tabernacle.

Section: Deuteronomy_Rabbah
“These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan; in the wilderness, in the Arava, opposite the Red Sea, between Paran and Tofel, and Laban, and Hatzerot, and Di Zahav” (Deuteronomy 1:1). “These are the words” – halakha:1It is common in Devarim Rabba for the midrash to introduce halakhic discussions with the word “halakha.”  Is it permissible for a person of Israel to write a Torah scroll in any language? This is what the sages taught: The difference between Torah scrolls and phylacteries and mezuzot is only that Torah scrolls may be written in any language. Rabban Gamliel says: Even Torah scrolls, the Sages permitted to be written only in Greek.2See Megilla 8b. What is the source for Rabban Gamliel who says that it is permitted to write a Torah scroll in Greek? This is what our Rabbis learned: Bar Kappara said: It is written: “May God expand Yefet, and may he dwell in the tents of Shem” (Genesis 9:27) – let the words of Shem be stated in the language of Yefet.3Israel descends from Shem, and the Greeks descended from Yefet (see Genesis 10:2, 11:10–27).  That is why they permitted them to write it in Greek. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘See the language of the Torah, how dear it is, that it cures the tongue.’ From where is it derived? As it is written: “A healing tongue is a tree of life” (Proverbs 15:4), and a tree of life is nothing but Torah, as it is stated: “It is a tree of life for those who grasp it” (Proverbs 3:18). The language of the Torah unencumbers the tongue. Know that in the future, the Holy One blessed be He will take up excellent trees from the Garden of Eden. What is their excellence? It is that they cure the tongue, as it is stated: “Along the stream, upon its bank, on this side and on that side, [will grow every food tree]” (Ezekiel 47:12). From where is it derived that it is a cure for the tongue? As it is stated: “Its fruit will be for food and its leaf for healing” (Ezekiel 47:12). Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, one said: ‘It is a medicine,’ and one said: ‘Anyone who is mute and tastes of it, his tongue will be cured and it will immediately articulate matters of Torah,’ as so it is written: “on this side and on that side,” and [the phrase] “on this side and on that side” is [a reference to] nothing other than Torah, as it is stated: “[Tablets that were inscribed on both sides,] from this side and from that side they were inscribed” (Exodus 32:15). Rabbi Levi said: Why should we learn from elsewhere? Let us learn from its own place, as Moses, before he was privileged to receive the Torah, it is written in his regard: “I am not a man of words” (Exodus 4:10). When he was privileged to receive the Torah, his tongue was cured and he began speaking words. From where is it derived? From what we read in this context: “These are the words that Moses spoke.”
Another matter: “These are the words” – this is what the verse said: “One who rebukes a man will later find more favor than one with a slippery tongue” (Proverbs 28:23). Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: “One who rebukes” – this is Moses. “A man” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You are My flock, flock of My pasture, you are man” (Ezekiel 34:31). What is “later [aḥarai]”? The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘In order to bring them after Me [aḥarai].’1The word aḥarai can be a form of the word aḥarei, later, or aḥar, after, in which case aḥarai would mean “after me.”  “Will…find…favor” – this is Moses, as it is written: “And you also found favor in My eyes” (Exodus 33:12). “Than one with a slippery tongue” – this is Bilam, who was slippery-tongued in his prophecies,2Bilam was slippery tongued in the manner in which he expressed his prophetic blessings of Israel, meaning that he flattered them excessively.  and they [the Israelites] became haughty and stumbled in Shitim.3They grew haughty as a result of his blessings, and this led to their sinning with the daughters of Moav (see Numbers 25:1–3). Another matter, “one who rebukes a man will later [aḥarai]” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: What is aḥarai? The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Moses, as it were, rebuked Me to follow Israel, and rebuked Israel to follow Me [aḥarai].’ To Israel, he said: “You have sinned” (Exodus 32:30). To the Holy One blessed be He, he said: “Why should Your wrath be enflamed against Your people?” (Exodus 32:11). What is “why”?4After all, this was stated in the immediate aftermath of the egregious sin of the Golden Calf.  Rabbi Yitzḥak said: When Israel crafted the calf, the Holy One blessed be He sought to eradicate Israel’s enemies.5This is a euphemistic reference to Israel. Moses said to Him: ‘Master of the universe, this calf is useful to assist You.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘In what way can it assist Me?’ Moses said to Him: ‘If You cause the rain to fall, it can cause the dew to rise; You can produce the winds, and it, the lightning.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Are you, too, straying after the calf?’6How can you ascribe any power to this inanimate object?  Moses said before Him: ‘Then, “why should Your wrath be enflamed against Your people?”’7Moses argued that God should not appear to be jealous of an object that actually has no power (Maharzu; see also Etz Yosef).  To Israel he said: “You have sinned a great sin” (Exodus 32:30). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: To what is this matter comparable? To a king who became angry at his wife. He struck her and expelled her from his house. The groomsmen heard about this. They went to the king and said to him: ‘Oh, my lord, is this what a man does to his wife? What did she do to you?’ They went to her and said to her: ‘Until when will you anger him? Is it your first time? Is it your second time?’ Moses, too, when he went to the Holy One blessed be He, he said to Him: ‘“Why should your wrath be enflamed against your people,” are they not Your children?’ When he went to Israel, he said to them: ‘Until when will you anger Him? Is it your first time? Is it your second time?’ Likewise it says: “In the wilderness, in the Arava, opposite the Red Sea.”8Moses, in mentioning these places to the Israelites, was alluding to various occasions on which they angered God. 
Another matter: “These are the words that Moses spoke” – this is what the verse said: “You have done these, and I was silent. Did you think I was like you…?” (Psalms 50:21). What is “You have done these [eleh] and I was silent”? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: [God said:] ‘You performed [the sin of stating:] “This is [eleh] your god, Israel” (Exodus 32:4) in the wilderness and I was silent to you. Why? It is because Moses was appeasing Me and saying to Me: “Please forgive […this people]” (Numbers 14:19), and I listened to him.’ “Did you think I was like you” – you likened a form to its Creator, and the plant to the One who planted it. “[Did you think I was like you,] that I would reprove you and set it [ve’e’erkha] before your eyes?” (Psalms 50:21). Two amora’im, one said: I will arouse [a’orer] it all before you, and one said: I will arrange it all before you.9God may still punish the Israelites for the sin of the Golden Calf, as the verse states, “on the day of My reckoning, I will reckon their sin upon them” (Exodus 32:34) (Etz Yosef).  Moses said to them: ‘I am not rebuking you regarding what you are destined to perform, but rather, regarding what you performed in the past – “in the wilderness, in the Arava, opposite the Red Sea.”’
Another matter: “These are the words” – Rabbi Aḥa ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: The rebukes should have been said from the mouth of Bilam, and the blessings from the mouth of Moses; however, had Bilam rebuked them, Israel would have said: ‘An enemy is rebuking us.’ Had Moses blessed them, the nations of the world would have said: ‘Their beloved is blessing them.’ The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let Moses, who loves them, rebuke them, and Bilam, who hates them, bless them, so that it will be unquestionable that the blessings and the rebukes are deserved by Israel.’
Another matter, had another rebuked them, they would have said: ‘This is the one rebuking us?’ Moses, in whose regard it is written: “I did not take even a single donkey from them” (Numbers 16:15), that is the one appropriate to rebuke Israel. Another matter, if another would have said: “[Yitro said…] Now I know that the Lord is greater [than all the gods]” (Exodus 18:10–11), they would have said: ‘This is the one saying “now I know”?’ But Yitro, who knew, who circulated among all the houses of idol worship in the world and did not find any substance in them, and then came to convert, that is the one for whom it was appropriate to say: “Now I know.” Another matter, if another would have said: “Vanity of vanities, [all is vanity]” (Ecclesiastes 1:2), they would say: ‘This one does not have a peruta [to buy food] to eat, and he says “vanity of vanities”?’ But Solomon, in whose regard it is written: “The king caused silver to be in Jerusalem like stones” (I Kings 10:27), that is the one for whom it was appropriate to say: “Vanity of vanities.” Another matter, if another would have said: “He made everything beautiful in its time” (Ecclesiastes 3:11), they would say: ‘This one did not eat anything in all his days, and he says: “He made everything beautiful in its time”?’10He has never had a good meal or enjoyed the pleasures of life, so how can he said “He made everything beautiful in its time”?  But in regard of Solomon, it is written: “These officials provisioned King Solomon…they did not leave anything lacking” (I Kings 5:7); what is “they did not leave anything lacking”? Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: They would bring him beets in the summer and cucumbers in the rainy season;11These vegetables do not grow in the Land of Israel during those respective seasons, and therefore they had to be imported from other locations.  that is the one for whom it was appropriate to say: “He made everything beautiful in its time.” Another matter, if another would have said: “All the inhabitants of the earth are considered as nothing” (Daniel 4:32), they would say: ‘This one never ruled over two flies in all his days, and he says: “All the inhabitants of the earth are considered as nothing”?’ But Nebuchadnezzar, in whose regard it is written: “And everywhere the sons of man, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the heavens dwell, He has given into your hand and set your rule over all of them” (Daniel 2:38), that is the one for whom it was appropriate to say: “All the inhabitants of the earth are considered as nothing.” Another matter, if another would have said: “The Rock, His actions are perfect” (Deuteronomy 32:4), they would say: ‘This one does not know the about the essence of the attribute of justice, and he says: “The Rock, His actions are perfect”?’ But Moses, in whose regard it is written: “He informed Moses of His ways” (Psalms 103:7), that is the one for whom it was appropriate to say: “The Rock, His actions are perfect.”
Another matter: “These are the words [hadevarim]” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘My children were led in the world like bees [kadevorim] by the righteous and by prophets.’12Bees follow in a swarm after the queen, and so too Israel follows their righteous individuals and prophets.  Another matter: “these are the words [hadevarim]” – just as the bee [hadevora], its honey is sweet and its sting is bitter, so are matters of Torah. Anyone who violates them receives a punishment, as it is stated: “The adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death” (Leviticus 20:10); “its desecrators shall be put to death” (Exodus 31:14). But anyone who fulfills them merits life, as it is stated: “So that your days will be extended” (Exodus 20:12). Another matter, “these are the words [hadevarim]” – just as the bee [hadevora], its honey goes to its owner and its sting to others, so are matters of Torah. They are an elixir of life for Israel and a lethal drug for the idolaters. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Just as the bee, everything that it amasses, it amasses for its owner, so, too, all the mitzvot and good deeds that Israel amass, they amass for their Father in Heaven.
Another matter: “These are the words” – Rabbi Tanḥuma said: To what is the matter comparable? It is to a person who was selling purple wool and was proclaiming: ‘Here is purple wool.’ The king peered and heard his voice. He called him and said to him: ‘What are you selling?’ He said to him: ‘Nothing.’ He said to him: ‘I heard your voice, you were saying: Here is purple wool, and you say: Nothing?’ He said to him: ‘My master, truth is that it is purple wool, but for you it is nothing.’13Purple wool was considered a luxury item. The seller was saying that he was announcing to the masses that he had purple wool, but it was not of a quality worthy of a king, and therefore to the king he said that he had nothing (Etz Yosef).  So, Moses, before the Holy One blessed be He, who created the mouth and speech, he said: “I am not a man of words” (Exodus 4:10). But with Israel, it is written in his regard: “These are the words.”
Another matter: Rabbi Simon said: When the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses that he should review the Torah, he did not seek to rebuke them for what they had done.14Moses was going to review the Torah with the Israelites, but he did not intend to rebuke them.  Rabbi Simon said: To what is the matter comparable? To a disciple who was walking with his teacher and saw a glowing ember. He thought it was a gem. He took it and was burned. Days later, he was walking with his teacher and he saw a gem. He believed it was a glowing ember and he was afraid to touch it. His teacher said to him: ‘Take it, it is a gem.’ So, Moses said: ‘Because I said to them: “Hear, now, defiant ones” (Numbers 20:10), I received my punishment because of them;15Moses was punished by not be able to enter the Land of Israel; see Numbers 20:10–12.  will I now come to rebuke them?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Fear not.’
“The Lord your God has multiplied you, and, behold, you are today as the stars of the heavens in abundance” (Deuteronomy 1:10). Another matter: “These are the words” – the Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Since they accepted your rebukes, you must bless them.’ He then immediately blessed them. From where is it derived? As it is stated: “The Lord your God has multiplied [you]….”16The following verse states: “May the Lord, God of your fathers, add to you one thousand times as you are, and He will bless you, as He spoke to you” (Deuteronomy 1:11).  From where is it derived that anyone who accepts rebuke merits a blessing? It is from what Solomon articulates: “For those who rebuke it will be pleasant, and a blessing of goodness will come upon them” (Proverbs 24:25). The Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: ‘In this world, you were blessed by others. In the future, I will bless you,’ as it is stated: “May God be gracious to us and bless us…” (Psalms 67:2).
“May the Lord, God of your fathers, add to you one thousand times as you are, and He will bless you, as He spoke to you” (Deuteronomy 1:11). “The Lord, God of your fathers” – halakha: Is it permitted for a man of Israel who was appointed as Sage or judge over the congregation to sit in judgment by himself? So taught our Rabbis: Do not judge alone, as there is only One who judges alone, as it is stated: “He is One, who can respond to Him?” (Job 23:13). What is “He is One”? Reish Lakish said: It is that the Holy One blessed be He judges and issues the ruling by Himself. Rabbi Reuven said: What is the seal of the Holy One blessed be He? It is truth. Why is it truth [emet]? Emet has three letters: Alef – the first of the letters; mem – the middle one; tav – the last of them, saying: “I am first and I am last and besides Me there is no God” (Isaiah 44:6). “Provide for yourselves men who are wise, understanding, and known to your tribes, and I will place them at your head” (Deuteronomy 1:13). The Rabbis said: Come and see, when Moses was appointed over them, he said to them: ‘I am unable to bear your burden by myself; instead, appoint judges for yourselves, so that they will judge you,’ as it is stated: “Provide for yourselves men…” Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: Judges must have seven attributes, and they are: “Wise, understanding, and known to your tribes,” and four [additional attributes], as it is written elsewhere: “You shall identify from all the people [accomplished men, fearers of God, men of truth, haters of ill-gotten gain]” (Exodus 18:21). Why were the seven not written at once? It is [to indicate] that if [individuals] with the seven [attributes] are not found, one brings [individuals] who have four. If [individuals] with four are not found, one brings [individuals] who have three. If [individuals] with three are not found, one brings [individuals] with one, as so it is written: “An accomplished woman who can find?” (Proverbs 31:10).17This indicates that it is difficult to find even one individual who is accomplished, and being acccomplished is but one of the seven attributes that one should look for in a judge; if one finds one with this characteristic, one should appoint him (see Etz Yosef; Anaf Yosef).  “And I will place them [vaasimem] at your head” – vaasimem is written without a yod.18Thus, it can be read vaashamam, their guilt.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Moses said to them: ‘If you do not heed them, the guilt will be on your heads.’ To what is the matter comparable? To a serpent whose  tail said to the head: ‘Until when will you go first? Let me go first.’ [The head] said to it: ‘Go.’ It went and encountered a water hole and cast [the head] into it. It went and encountered fire, and cast [the head] into the fire. It encountered thorns, and cast [the head] into them. What caused this? It is because the head followed the tail. So, when the lowly heed the great, [the great individuals] decree before the Omnipresent and He performs [their will].19They can pray and abolish any negative decrees that may have been decreed upon the people (Maharzu).  But when the great follow the lowly, they fall [due to] those they are following.  Another matter, Rabbi Hoshaya said: To what is the matter comparable? To a bride who was standing under her wedding canopy and her hands became sooty. If she wipes them on the wall, the wall will become sooty and her hands will not be cleaned; if [she wipes them] on the floor mosaic, the floor mosaic will become sooty and her hands will not be cleaned. But if she wipes them on her hair, her hair will be beautified and her hands will be cleaned. So, when Israel heed their great ones, and their great ones do not attend to their needs,20If they do not provide proper leadership.  the guilt is on the head of the great ones, but if not, [the guilt] will be on their own heads. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: When Israel heed their great ones and their great ones do not attend to their needs, at that moment: “The Lord will enter into judgment with the elders of His people and its princes” (Isaiah 3:14). Why to that extent?21This question refers back to what was stated at the beginning of this passage (Devarim Rabba 1:10), that one should not judge alone (Maharzu).  Because the burden of the congregation is very difficult, and no one person is capable of bearing the burden of the congregation by himself. Know that this is so, as Moses, master of all the prophets, was unable to bear the burden of the congregation by himself. From where is it derived? “I spoke to you at that time [saying: I am unable to bear you alone]” (Deuteronomy 1:9). At what time? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: At the time of Yitro’s [visit]. From where is this derived? As it is written: “As the matter is too arduous for you; you cannot do it by yourself” (Exodus 18:18). Rabbi Ḥiyya said: At the time of the complainers, as it is stated: “I cannot bear this entire people alone, because it is too heavy for me” (Numbers 11:14). “Did I conceive [this entire people; did I give birth to it?]” (Numbers 11:12) – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: [Moses] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, you said: “Who have been borne [by Me] from birth, [who are carried from the womb]” (Isaiah 46:3) – it is appropriate for You to bear them.’ Moses said to Israel: ‘As you live, I am capable of bearing ten like you. Why, then, am I not capable of bearing you? It is because the Lord your God has multiplied you beyond the capability of your judges.’22Moses was capable of judging a nation ten times as large as Israel, but God bestowed upon them such blessing that they became haughty and could not bear to see another benefit at their expense, and therefore they would be quick to run to the judges to press their claims (Etz Yosef).  From where is it derived? It is from what we read regarding the matter: “The Lord your God has multiplied you” (Deuteronomy 1:10).
Another matter, “the Lord your God has multiplied you” – this is what the verse said: “I will bow to Your holy Sanctuary in reverence to You” (Psalms 5:8). Rabbi Ilai ben Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham that he would redeem his children with two letters. From where is this derived? As it is written: “And also that nation that they will serve, I will judge” (Genesis 15:14).23The word judge [dan] is written with two letters – dalet nun.  But when He came to redeem them, He redeemed them with seventy-two letters. Rabbi Yudan said: From [the words]: “To come and take for Himself a nation” (Deuteronomy 4:34) until the end of the verse there are seventy-two letters.24In Hebrew, this segment of the verse (from “to come and take for Himself a nation from the midst of a nation” until “with great awesome deeds”) totals seventy-two letters (see Bereshit Rabba 44:19). Several commentaries write that the text of the midrash here should be emended to match the version there, as this is not in fact the end of the verse (see Matnot Kehuna; Rashash).  Rabbi Avin said: He redeemed them with His name and His name has seventy-two letters.25“God’s name of seventy-two letters actually consists of seventy-two group of letters, each group being three letters. The letters dalet nun appear in the fiftieth group. Israel would be redeemed through an incomplete name of God if they would not repent, but through repentance they would experience redemption through the full name of seventy-two.” Another matter, Rabbi Ilai said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: Why did the Holy One blessed be He not reveal to Abraham our patriarch that He would provide his descendants with manna? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: So is the way of the righteous; they say little and do a lot. Another matter, why did He not reveal it to them? It is because had he revealed it to them, Israel would have said: ‘We have already eaten it at Pharaoh’s table.’26Had the Israelites known what the manna was, by tradition from their forefathers, they would not have been awestruck when it fell, and the wicked among them would have falsely claimed to have eaten it before.  Know that they [the Egyptians] would not provide them with straw, but Israel would say: “We remember the fish [that we used to eat in Egypt…]” (Numbers 11:5); that is why He did not reveal it to them. Another matter, Rabbi Ilai said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham that He would increase his children like the stars. From where is this derived? As it is stated: “[He took him outside, and said: Look now toward the heavens, and count the stars, if you can count them, and He said to him:] So your offspring will be” (Genesis 15:5). But when He came to bless them, He blessed them more than He had said to them. “What is “in abundance”? “And multiply [harba arbe] [your descendants as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand that is upon the seashore” (Genesis 22:17).27The double verb is expounded to mean that He will multiply them as both the stars of the heavens and as the sand upon the shore. What is [the meaning of the verse] that states: “Deliver me from the strife of the people; place me [at the head of nations]”? (Psalms 18:44). David said: “Deliver me from the strife of my people” (II Samuel 22:44) – that I will not have to be judged by  them; “Deliver me from the strife of the people” – that they will not have to be judged by me. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘David, why are you sitting with them? By your life, I have already appointed you king over them.’ He said to Him: ‘Since You appointed me over Your children, put into their hearts that they shall heed me,’ as so it is written: “As soon as they hear, they heed me” (Psalms 18:45). Moreover, David said: “Place me at the head of nations”28He pleaded to be the judge of other nations, not of Israel. –Rabbi Berekhya said: If you judge this nation [Israel], it will come and deliver you to God. Who is that? It is the God of gods, who sees but is not seen.29David did not want to judge Israel, because in the event of an error, they would present their complaints to God and David could be punished (Etz Yosef).  Moses said to Israel: ‘As you live, I am capable of bearing ten like you and one hundred like you. Why, then, am I not capable of bearing you on my own? It is because the Lord your God has multiplied you beyond the capability of your judges.’
“The Lord your God has multiplied you, and, behold, you are today as the stars [of the heavens in abundance [larov]]” (Deuteronomy 1:10) – he said to them: ‘Today you are like the stars, but in the future, “larov” – you are destined to be similar to your Master [lerabkhem].’ How so? Here it is written: “For the Lord your God is a consuming fire” (Deuteronomy 4:24), and regarding Israel in the future it is written: “And the light of Israel will be a fire and its Holy One a flame” (Isaiah 10:17). Rabbi Levi bar Ḥama said: If one who worships an idol becomes like it, as it is stated: “Those who craft them, all who place their trust in them, will become like them” (Psalms 115:8), one who worships the Holy One blessed be He, all the more so that he will be like Him. From where is this derived? As it is written: “Blessed is the man who places his trust in the Lord…” (Jeremiah 17:7). Another matter, Rabbi Abba said: In the future, the partition of the righteous will be farther inside than that of the ministering angels,30The righteous will be closer to the Divine Presence.  and [the angels] will ask them: ‘What halakhot did the Holy One blessed be He introduce today?’ Rabbi Levi bar Ḥanina said: Do not wonder, as even in this world their partition is farther inside than that of the ministering angels, as it is stated: “[I see four men…and the fourth resembles a son of the gods” (Daniel 3:25); they were farther inside than the angel, and he would extinguish the fire before them.31When Ḥananya, Mishael and Azarya were thrown into the fiery furnace and were unharmed, the people outside saw a fourth figure, which was an angel. The fact that he is described as the fourth implies that he was following them, yet he was still able to extinguish the fire before them so they would not be harmed (Matnot Kehuna). Alternatively, they walked before the angel in the fire and were not harmed, or perhaps even protected the angel from harm (see Etz Yosef). 
“The Lord, God of your fathers [shall add to you one thousand times as you are…]” (Deuteronomy 1:11) – Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: In considering Moses’s blessings, they contain [unlimited blessing] from one end of the world to the other. What is written? “One thousand times [pe’amim]” – “one thousand times [paam]” is not written here, but rather, “one thousand times [pe’amim].”32The plural term pe’amim is employed, rather than the singular paam. This is  expounded to mean one thousand times one thousand. Another matter, “shall add to you…as you are” – Rabbi Aḥa said: Israel could have said to him: ‘Our master Moses, are we responsible for any of the matters regarding which you are rebuking us?’33They could have responded to him that he was rebuking them for the sins of their parents, for which they were not responsible (Etz Yosef).  Nevertheless, they accepted his rebukes and were silent.34Translation based on the textual emendation suggested in Etz Yosef.  That is why it says: “As you are” – righteous like you, who receive rebukes and are silent. Another matter, why did he bless them with an expression of addition? It is because the addition of the Holy One, blessed be He, is larger than the principal. The way of the world is that a person takes from another a litra of meat, and says to him: ‘Add more for me.’ How much does he add for him? One ounce. But the Holy One blessed be He, His addition is larger than the principal. How so? Isaac was the principal son for Abraham. But what He added for [Abraham] was more numerous than the principal, as it is stated: “Abraham took an additional wife” (Genesis 25:1).35Abraham’s additional wife, Keturah, bore him six sons (see Genesis 25:2); many more than the one son, Isaac, who was his principal son.  Joseph was the principal son for Rachel, Benjamin was an addition. From where is this derived? As it is written: “May the Lord add another son for me” (Genesis 30:24). What is written? “And the sons of Benjamin: Bela, Bekher, and Ashbel…” (Genesis 46:21) – they are more than Joseph.36Benjamin had ten sons, many more than Joseph, who had only two sons.  Hezekiah’s principal reign was fourteen years. What the Holy One blessed be He added for him was more numerous than the principal. From where is this derived? As it is stated: “I will add fifteen years to your days” (Isaiah 38:5) – the addition of the Holy One blessed be He was more numerous than the principal. That is why [Moses] blessed them with an expression of addition.  “And He will bless you” (Deuteronomy 1:11) – Rabbi Levi said: To what is the matter comparable? To a king who told the commander of his army to distribute to each of his soldiers a litra of gold.37There are one hundred gold pieces in a litra. He went and gave some of them five gold pieces and some of them ten gold pieces. They said to him: ‘The king told you to give each of us a litra of gold, and you gave each of us five gold pieces?’ He said to them: ‘These are from what is mine; when the king comes, he will give you from what is his.’ So Israel said to Moses: ‘The Holy One blessed be He did not set a limit for our blessings, and you said one thousand times?’ He said to them: ‘What I blessed you, I blessed you from my own; the Holy One blessed be He will bless you “as He spoke to you”’ (Deuteronomy 1:11).
Another matter, “the Lord your God has multiplied you, [and, behold, you are today as the stars of the heavens in abundance]” (Deuteronomy 1:10) – why did he bless them like the stars? Just as among the stars, there are levels upon levels, so, too, among Israel there are levels upon levels.38Priests, Levites, and Israelites (see Etz Yosef).  Just as the stars are neither fathomable nor quantifiable, so Israel is neither fathomable nor quantifiable. Just as the stars rule from one end of the world to the other, so does Israel. [Moses] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, why did You not liken them to the sun and the moon, which are larger than stars?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘The sun and the moon will have shame in the future.’ From where is this derived? As it is written: “The moon will be disgraced and the sun will be ashamed, [for the Lord of hosts will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem]” (Isaiah 24:23). ‘But the stars will never have shame.’ From where is this derived? So it is written: “You will know that I am in the midst of Israel, and I am the Lord your God, and there is no other, and My people will nevermore be ashamed” (Joel 2:27).
“You have circled this mountain enough; turn yourselves to the north” (Deuteronomy 2:3). “You have circled this mountain enough” – halakha: If a person of Israel is scrupulous in honoring his father and mother, what is his reward? This is what our Rabbis taught: These are the matters whose profits a person enjoys  in this world, while the principal remains for him for the World to Come. They are: Honoring one’s father and mother…. Rabbi Abbahu said: The students of Rabbi Eliezer HaGadol asked him: ‘What is [true] honoring of one’s father and mother?’ He said to them: ‘Go out and see what Dama ben Netina did in Ashkelon.’ His mother was mentally disturbed and she would slap him [when he was] with his counterparts, but all he would say to her was: ‘That is enough, mother.’ Our Rabbis said: One time, the Sages came to him to purchase from him a gem that had been lost from the priestly vestments. He resided in Ashkelon and they settled with him for one thousand gold pieces. He entered and found his father’s leg extended on the chest in which the gem was found, and he was asleep. He did not seek to disturb him, and he went out empty-handed. When he did not take it out, they were under the impression that he was asking them for more, and they raised the price [they were offering] to ten thousand gold pieces. When his father awakened from his sleep, he entered and took it out to them. They sought to give him ten thousand gold pieces. He said: ‘God forbid. I will not benefit from the reward for honoring my parents. Rather, the money that I settled with you, one thousand gold pieces, that is what I will take from you.’ What reward did the Holy One blessed be He give him? Our Rabbis said: During that year, his cow gave birth to a red heifer, and he sold it for more than ten thousand gold pieces. See how great honoring of one’s father and mother is. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: No person respected his parents like I did my parents, and I found that Esau honored his father more than I did. How so? Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: I would serve my father with soiled garments, but when I would go to the marketplace, I could cast off those garments and don fine garments, and go out in them. But Esau did not do so; rather, the garments that he would wear to serve his father were finer.39Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel served his father in soiled garments in order to indicate his willingness to act even as a servant in serving his father. But Esau would put on his finest clothes, as though he were going to meet a government officer. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel reconsidered and decided that Esau’s method afforded greater honor to his parents (Maharzu).  Know that it is so, for when [Esau] went out to hunt and bring [food] to his father, so he would bless him, what did Rebecca, who loved her son Jacob, do? She gave him delicacies, and said to him: ‘Go to your father and take the blessings before your brother takes them.’ At that moment, Jacob said to her: ‘Mother, do you not know that my brother Esau “is a hairy man, and I am a smooth-skinned man”? (Genesis 27:11). Let my father not sense that I am not Esau, or I will be shamed before him.’ From where is this derived? As it is stated: “Perhaps my father will feel me, [and I will be in his eyes as a deceiver, and I will bring upon myself a curse and not a blessing]” (Genesis 27:12). She said to him: ‘My son, your father’s eyes are dim and I will dress you in the fine garments that your brother wears when he serves your father. When you come to him, he will hold your hand, and will think that you are Esau, and bless you.’ From where is this derived? As it is stated: “Rebecca took the fine garments of Esau…” (Genesis 27:15) with which he was accustomed to serve his father, as it is stated: “She dressed Jacob” (Genesis 27:15). That is why, when Jacob entered to him, what did Isaac say to him? “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau” (Genesis 27:22). [Isaac] blessed him and [Jacob] went out, and Esau came and went in to his father. [Isaac] said to him: ‘Who are you, who is speaking to me with a big heart ?’ He said to him: “I am your son, your firstborn, Esau” (Genesis 27:32). When he heard his voice, he knew that he was Esau. He said to him: “Your brother came with deceit, and he took your blessing” (Genesis 27:35). At that moment, Esau began screaming and saying: ‘Come and see what this simple man did to me, in whose regard it is written: “Jacob was a simple man, a dweller in tents” (Genesis 25:27). Is it not enough that he mocked me for selling him my birthright, “and, behold, now he has taken my blessing”?’ (Genesis 27:36). You learn that Esau was scrupulous in honoring his parents. Rabbi Yudan said: When Israel came to wage war against him,40The Israelites intended to wage war against Edom, the descendants of Esau, as they travelled from the wilderness into the Land of Israel.  the Holy One blessed be He showed Moses the mountain in which the patriarchs were buried. He said to him: ‘Say to Israel: You cannot confront him. Even now, the reward for honoring those buried on this mountain is owed him.’ From where is it derived? It is from what we read regarding the matter: “You have circled this mountain enough.”41The following verses record God’s instruction to Israel not to militarily confront Edom (see Deuteronomy 2:4–5). 
Another matter, “you have circled this mountain enough” – this is what the verse said: “Who will lead me to the fortified city?” (Psalms 60:11) – this is Rome. Why does David call it fortified [matzor]? It is a city that torments [shemetzera] and fortifies [umvatzra] Israel.42By tormenting Israel they cause them to repent, which thereby fortifies them. Another matter “the fortified city” – it is a city that is fortified on all sides, so that no person can conquer it. Another matter “the fortified city” – it is a city that everyone fortifies.43It is an empire that rules over many nations, all of which contribute to its defense. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: David was yearning and saying: “Who will lead me to the fortified city?” – if only I could exact punishment against it. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘David, can you overcome it?’ He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe: “Who guided me to Edom”’ (Psalms 60:11). He said before Him: ‘The One who already gave me dominion over Edom, He will give me dominion over this great one.’ From where is it derived that David had dominion over Edom? As it is stated: “David placed netzivim in Edom” (II Samuel 8:14). What are netzivim? Rabbi Simon said: Officials. The Rabbis said: Statues.44Statues of David. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘David, I know that your hands are quick and industrious, and I seek to subdue My world with them.’ Another matter, [God said:] ‘David, I need them [Edom] for the generations. Moses already sought to confront them, but I said to him: “You [have circled this mountain] enough [rav laḥem] – the master will command his disciples:45God told Moses to command the Israelites.  ‘Circle this mountain.’
Another matter, “you have circled…enough” – that is what the verse said: “Be silent before the Lord, vehitḥolel for Him…” (Psalms 37:7). What is “vehitḥolel for Him”? Place your hope in the Holy One blessed be He, like the matter that is stated: “Why, my soul, are you stooped over? …[Have hope [hoḥili] in God]” (Psalms 42:6). Another matter, “vehitḥolel for Him” – Rabbi Taḥlifa of Caesarea said: What is “vehitḥolel for Him”? If suffering has befallen you, accept it with fear [beḥila]. “Do not contend with one who prospers” (Psalms 37:7) – this is Esau, in whose regard it is written: “Why is the way of the wicked successful?” (Jeremiah 12:1). “The man who is busy with intrigue” (Psalms 37:7) – this is Esau,46The reference is to Rome, who were identified by the Romans as descendants of Edom, and therefore of Esau.  who judges people deceitfully. How so? The judge of the empire would judge the murderer and say: ‘Why did you kill?’ [The accused] would say: ‘I did not kill him.’ [The judge] would ask him: ‘With what did you kill him, with a sword, a spear, or a dagger?’47The judge would not accept the claims of the defendant, and would continue to cross examine him as though he were guilty, and the defendant would be confused and say something incriminating even if he was innocent.  Another matter, “be silent before the Lord, vehitḥolel for Him” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When the enemies came to destroy Jerusalem, there were sixty myriads of angels of destruction, and they were standing at the entrance of the Sanctuary in order to strike them. They saw the Divine Presence looking and being silent – from where is this derived? As it is written: “He withdrew His right hand from being before the enemy” (Lamentations 2:3) – so they [the angels] also gave them [the enemies] space [allowing them to destroy Jerusalem]. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: He saw [Esau] destroying His home and was silent, and you wish to confront him? Even now, the reward for honoring his parents is owed him. “You have circled…enough” – what is “circled the mountain [hahar]”? Rabbi Ḥanina said: Esau circulated around this parent of his [horo], namely his father, who needed him to feed him. From where is this derived? “Isaac loved Esau because of the game in his mouth” (Genesis 25:28). Rabbi Shmuel ben Rabbi Gedalya said: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I will pay his reward.’ When Jacob gave a gift to Esau, what did Esau say to him? “I have plenty [rav]” (Genesis 33:9); do not exert yourself. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘With this expression, he honored [Jacob], with this expression, I will say to [the Israelites]: Turn away from him, “you have circled enough [rav].”’
Another matter, what is “You [have circled] enough…”? Rabbi Aḥa said: If you harm him, you are really harming yourselves. How so? His father blessed him with one blessing: “By your sword you will live” (Genesis 27:40), and he blessed Jacob with ten blessings. From where is this derived? As it is written: “God will give you from the dew of the heavens” (Genesis 27:28).48Ten blessings are listed in this verse and the following one.  If his blessing is void, your ten blessings will be void – “you have circled enough…”49The midrash is commenting on the verses that follow, in which the Israelites are warned not to confront Edom. Alternatively, it is picking up on the Hebrew words for “you…enough [rav lakhem],” which can be translated to mean that what is yours [lakhem] is greater [rav] than that which is Esau’s (Midrash HaMevoar). 
Rabbi Berekhya said: When Esau came in to his father and saw that Jacob had taken the blessings, he said to [Isaac]: ‘Did you not leave even one blessing for me?’ As it is stated: “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?” (Genesis 27:36). Isaac said to him: ‘Even if I bless you, I will be blessing him. Did I not say so to him: “Be a lord to your brethren”? (Genesis 27:29). The slave and everything that he has, do they not belong to his master?’ What is “turn yourselves to the north [tzafona]”? Rabbi Ḥiyya said: [God] said to them: ‘If you see that he50The reference is to Esau, meaning, his descendants.  is seeking to provoke you, do not confront him. Instead, conceal [hatzpinu] yourselves from him until his world will pass.’51Until his success and power pass. That is, “turn yourselves to the north.” Rabbi Yehuda bar Shalom said: Israel said to Him: ‘Master of the universe, his father gave him the blessing: “By your sword you will live” (Genesis 27:40), and You confirmed it for him, and You say to us: Conceal yourselves from him? To where will we flee?’ He said to them: ‘If you see that they are confronting you, flee to the Torah.’ Tzafona is nothing other than Torah, as it is stated: “He reserves [yitzpon] the Torah for the upright” (Proverbs 2:7). Another matter, what is “tzafona”? Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Wait until the time when the messianic king will come and fulfill: “How great is the goodness [You have in store [tzafanta] for those who fear You]”’ (Psalms 31:20).
“Command the people, saying: You are passing through the border of your brethren, the children of Esau, who live in Se’ir; they will be afraid of you, and you shall be very careful” (Deuteronomy 2:4). “Command the people, saying” – The Holy One blessed be He said to [Moses]: ‘Not only am I commanding you, but you, too, shall command your children.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘You, too, shall command the leaders of the generation, that they should treat [Esau] with deference.’ That is, “command the people, saying.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: When Esau stood with Jacob, Esau said to him: ‘Jacob my brother, let the two of us walk in this world as one.’ Jacob said to him: “Let my lord now pass before his servant” (Genesis 33:14). What is “now pass”? Take your world first.52Esau offered Jacob to be partners in both this world and the World to Come. Jacob responded that Esau should take his world first, meaning that he would be successful in this world without Jacob, and Jacob would enjoy the World to Come without Esau (Etz Yosef).  What is: “And I will advance slowly, according to the pace of the property [that is before me, and according to the pace of the children]”? (Genesis 33:14). He said to [Esau]: ‘I still need to produce Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya, in whose regard it is written: “Youths in whom there is no blemish”’ (Daniel 1:4).53Jacob did not want his descendants to be tainted by a potential partnership with Esau.  Another matter, he said: ‘I still need to produce the messianic king, in whose regard it is written: “For a child has been born to us”’ (Isaiah 9:5). “Until I will come to my lord, to Se’ir” (Genesis 33:14) – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: We reviewed the entire Bible and did not find that Jacob stood with Esau in Se’ir. What is “to Se’ir”? He said to him: ‘I still need to produce judges and redeemers in order to exact retribution from that man.’ From where is this derived? As it is stated “Saviors will ascend [Mount Zion to judge the mountain of Esau]” (Obadiah 1:21). Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, until when will we be subjugated to him?’ He said to them: ‘Until that day will come, about which it is written: “A star will rise from Jacob, and a scepter will rise from Israel” (Numbers 24:17) – when a star will emerge from Jacob and burn the straw of Esau.’ From where is this derived? As it is stated: “The house of Jacob will be fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, [and the house of Esau for straw…]” (Obadiah 1:18). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘At that time, I will cause My kingdom to appear, and I will reign over you, as it is stated: “Saviors will ascend Mount Zion….”’
“The Lord said to me: See, I have begun delivering before you Siḥon and his land; begin taking possession of his land” (Deuteronomy 2:31). “The Lord said to me: See, I have begun…” – halakha: If a person of Israel is walking on the road on the day before Shabbat and it begins getting dark, and he has money or something else in his hand, what must he do? So taught the Sages: One for whom it became dark [while he was traveling] on the road gives his purse to a gentile. Why is it permitted for him to give it to a gentile? Rabbi Levi said: When the descendants of Noah were commanded, they were commanded regarding only seven matters, and Shabbat is not one of them. That is why they permitted him to give it to a gentile. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: An idolater who observed Shabbat before he accepted circumcision upon himself incurs liability to be put to death. Why? Because they were not commanded [to observe] it. What did you see that led you to say that an idolater who observed Shabbat incurs liability to be put to death? Rabbi Hiyya bar Abba said that Rabbbi Yoḥanan said: The way of the world is that when a king and a noblewoman are sitting and conversing with one another, one who comes and inserts himself between them, does he not incur liability to be put to death? So, the Shabbat is between Israel and the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “Between Me and the children of Israel [it is a sign forever]” (Exodus 31:17). That is why any idolater who comes and inserts himself between them, before he accepted circumcision upon himself, incurs liability to be put to death. The Rabbis say: Moses said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, given that idolaters were not commanded regarding Shabbat, if they observe it, will You lift Your countenance to them?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Do you fear this matter, as you live, even were they to fulfill all the mitzvot in the Torah, I will topple them before you.’ From where is this derived? From what we read regarding the matter: “See, I have begun delivering before you.”
Another matter, “see, I have begun” – this is what the verse said: “To bind their kings with fetters” (Psalms 149:8). Who are “their kings”? These are the kings of the idolaters.   “And their nobles with iron chains” (Psalms 149:8) – these are their guardian angels on High, as the Holy One blessed be He does not exact retribution from a nation until He first exacts retribution from its guardian angel. How so?  The Holy One blessed be He did not submerge Pharaoh and all the Egyptians in the sea until He first submerged its guardian angel. From where do we derive this? The Rabbis said: “Horses and their riders” is not written here, but rather, “the horse and its rider” (Exodus 15:1) – this is their guardian angel. When the Egyptians departed to pursue Israel, Israel lifted their eyes and they saw Egypt’s guardian angel floating in the air. From where is this derived? Rabbi Yitzḥak said: As it is written: “Behold, Egypt was traveling after them” (Exodus 14:10) – this is their guardian angel. That is, “to bind their kings with fetters…”  (Psalms 149:8). Siḥon and Og, too, when they sought to confront Israel, the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘See that I have toppled their guardian angel, as it is stated: “See, I have begun delivering before you.”’
Another matter, “see, I have begun” – this is what the verse said: “Expectation deferred sickens the heart” (Proverbs 13:12). Rabbi Azarya said: It is speaking of the salvation that is expected to come. How so? When the prophet says to Israel: “Another one will be soon, and I will quake the heavens, and the earth” (Haggai 2:6), they say: “Expectation deferred sickens the heart.” When he said to them: “Behold, your Savior has come” (Isaiah 62:11), they said: “And desire realized is a tree of life” (Proverbs 13:12). Another matter, “expectation deferred” – this is Pharaoh, as Moses was coming and going and bringing plagues upon him, and with each and every plague, Israel believed that he would release them. “And desire realized is a tree of life” – this is the wars of Siḥon and Og, as the Holy One blessed be He said to him immediately: “See, I have begun delivering before you.” Another matter, what is “see, I have begun”? The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Moses, see that I have toppled their guardian angel.’ Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said:  Like a king who ties up his son’s enemy, and says to him: ‘Do to him anything that you wish.’
Another matter, “see, I have begun” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: When Israel departed from Egypt, and the Holy One blessed be He performed all those miracles on their behalf, dread of them fell upon all the nations of the world, as it is stated: “May dread and fear fall over them” (Exodus 15:16). When they came to wage war with Siḥon and Og, the Emorites were asking one another: ‘As you live, this nation that seeks to wage war with us, are they mighty or not? How many nations are they?’ They said: ‘They are members of three nations.’54Priests, Levites, and Israelites. Siḥon and Og said: ‘This entire nation of people are members of three nations?’ They said: ‘Let us arm ourselves and go out against them and we will kill them.’ From where is this derived? “Siḥon went out to war toward us” (Deuteronomy 2:32). Moses and Israel came to the environs of Edre’i. Moses said to them: ‘Let us camp here and we will enter [the city] in the morning.’ They came to enter Edre’i, and the eye could not yet see.55It was still dark. Moses lifted his eyes and saw Og sitting on the wall and his feet reached the ground. Moses said: ‘I do not know what I am seeing. Did they build another wall at night?’56He thought Og was part of the wall. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Moses, what you see is Og.’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The length of his legs was eighteen cubits. At that moment, Moses was afraid. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Fear not, as I will topple him before you.’ From where is this derived? “The Lord said to Moses: Do not fear him” (Numbers 21:34). Og would uproot a mountain and cast it on Israel, and Moses would take a pebble, intone the ineffable Name, and it [the pebble] would intercept it [the mountain]. Israel said: ‘Cursed are the hands that cast in that way.’ The Emorites said: ‘Blessed are the hands that intercept in that way.’
“The Lord said to me: Do not fear him, as I have delivered him and his entire people and his land into your hand; you shall do to him as you did to Siḥon, king of the Emorites, who lives in Ḥeshbon” (Deuteronomy 3:2). Another matter, “the Lord said to me: Do not fear him” – “because I will deliver him into your hand” is not written here, but, “as I have delivered him…into your hand.” The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I have already issued his sentence, from the days of Abraham.’ How so? When Lot, his son’s brother, was taken captive, Og came and informed Abraham, as it is stated: “The fugitive [hapalit] came [and told Abram the Hebrew]” (Genesis 14:13). Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Kappara:  Palit was his name. Why was he called by the name Og? It is because he came and found Abraham engaged in the mitzvot of cakes [ugot]57Matza (see, e.g., Exodus 12:39).  on Passover. But he did not come for the sake of Heaven, but because of Sarah’s beauty. He said in his heart: ‘I will bring him the news, the regiment will kill him, and I will take his wife Sarah.’ The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Oh wicked one, is that what you say? As you live, I will give you the reward for your legs, and extend your years.58Og lived an exceptionally long life as reward for having gone with his legs to inform Abraham.  But for what you thought in your heart: I will have Abraham killed, and I will take Sarah; in the hand of her descendants, this man59A reference to Og himself. is destined to fall. Another matter, “as I have delivered him…into your hand” – “because I will deliver him into your hand” is not written here, but, “as I have delivered him…into your hand.” I have already issued his sentence, from the days of Isaac. How so? When Abraham circumcised his son Isaac, he made a feast and invited all the kings of Canaan, as it is stated: “Abraham made a great feast…” (Genesis 21:8). What is “great”? It is that all the prominent men were there. Og, too, was there. At that time they said to Og: ‘Did you not used to say: Abraham is a barren mule and cannot beget children?’ When he saw Isaac, he said: ‘This is nothing, I can kill him with my finger.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Is this what you say? [I will extend your years] so that you will see thousands and myriads emerging from him, and in their hand, this man is destined to fall.’ Another matter, “because I will deliver him into your hand” is not written here, but, “I have delivered.” I already issued his sentence from the days of Jacob. How so? When Jacob came in to Pharaoh to bless him, as it is stated: “Jacob blessed Pharaoh” (Genesis 47:7), Og was sitting there. At that moment, Pharaoh said to Og: ‘Did you not used to say: Abraham is a barren mule and cannot beget children? Here is his grandson and seventy of his offspring.’ At that moment, Og began introducing the evil eye upon them. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Oh, wicked one, why are you introducing the evil eye upon my children? May the eye of this man dissolve. This man is destined to fall into their hand.’ That is, “as I have delivered him…into your hand.” The Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: ‘Just as, in this world, the nations of the world would hear your renown and were afraid and terrified of you, so it will be in the future, as it is stated: “All the peoples of the earth will see that the name of the Lord is invoked upon you and they will fear you” (Deuteronomy 28:10).

Section: Song_of_Songs_Rabbah
The Song of Songs, byaOr “concerning.” Solomon.
bHeb. “Let him give me of the kisses of his mouth!”Oh, give me of the kisses of your mouth,-bFor your love is more delightful than wine.
Your ointments yield a sweet fragrance,Your name is like finestcMeaning of Heb. uncertain. oil—Therefore do maidens love you.
Draw me after you, let us run!dEmendation yields “Bring me, O king, to your chambers.”The king has brought me to his chambers.-dLet us delight and rejoice in your love,Savoring it more than wine—eUnderstanding mesharim as related to tirosh; cf. Aramaic merath.Like new wine-e they love you!
I am dark, but comely,O daughters of Jerusalem—Like the tents of Kedar,Like the pavilions of Solomon.
Don’t stare at me because I am swarthy,Because the sun has gazed upon me.My mother’s sons quarreled with me,They made me guard the vineyards;My own vineyard I did not guard.
Tell me, you whom I love so well;Where do you pasture your sheep?Where do you rest them at noon?Let me not be cMeaning of Heb. uncertain.as one who strays-cBeside the flocks of your fellows.
If you do not know, O fairest of women,Go follow the tracks of the sheep,And graze your kidsfAs a pretext for coming.By the tents of the shepherds.
I have likened you, my darling,To a mare in Pharaoh’s chariots:
Your cheeks are comely with plaited wreaths,Your neck with strings of jewels.
We will add wreaths of goldTo your spangles of silver.
While the king was on his couch,My nard gave forth its fragrance.
My beloved to me is a bag of myrrhLodged between my breasts.
My beloved to me is a spray of henna bloomsFrom the vineyards of En-gedi.
Ah, you are fair, my darling,Ah, you are fair,With your dove-like eyes!
And you, my beloved, are handsome,Beautiful indeed!Our couch is in a bower;
Cedars are the beams of our house,Cypresses the rafters.

Section: Ecclesiastes_Rabbah
“The words of Kohelet, son of David, king in Jerusalem” (Ecclesiastes 1:1).“The words of Kohelet, son of David, king in Jerusalem.” This is what the verse said, inspired by the Divine Spirit, [written] by Solomon, king of Israel: “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor? He will stand before kings” (Proverbs 22:29). There was an incident involving Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, who saw the residents of his city taking up vow offerings and gift offerings to Jerusalem. He said: Everyone is taking up vow offerings and gift offerings to Jerusalem; will I not take anything up? What did he do? He went out to the wilderness [outside] of his city and noticed a certain stone there. He broke it, he chiseled it, and he polished it. He said: I take it upon myself to bring it up to Jerusalem. He sought to hire laborers, and five people came before him. He said to them: ‘Will you take up this stone to Jerusalem for me?’ They said to him: ‘Give us five sela and we will take it up to Jerusalem.’ He sought to give it to them, but he did not have anything in his possession at that time. They left him and went on their way.The Holy One blessed be He arranged for five angels [to appear] to him in the guise of men. He said to them: ‘Will you take up this stone [to Jerusalem] for me?’ They said to him: ‘Give us five sela and we will take your stone up to Jerusalem for you, provided that you join us [in carrying the stone] with your hand and finger.’ He joined them with his hand and finger, and they found themselves standing in Jerusalem. He sought to give them their payment but he did not find them. He entered the Chamber of the Hewn Stone1The seat of the Sanhedrin. and asked after them. They said to him: ‘It appears that ministering angels took your stone up to Jerusalem,’ and they read this verse in his regard: “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor? He will stand before kings [melakhim].” Read, in his regard: “He will stand before angels [malakhim].”Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Ḥalafta: This is analogous to an adviser who achieved prominence in the royal palace. The king said to him: ‘Ask for whatever [you want and] I will give it to you.’ That adviser said: If I request silver, gold, or fine gems, he will give it to me; garments, he will give me. But I will request his daughter, and everything will be given to me along with his daughter. So, “In Givon, God appeared to Solomon in a nocturnal dream. God said: Ask, what shall I give you?” (I Kings 3:5). Solomon said: If I request silver, gold, and gems, He will give them to me. But I will request wisdom, and everything will be included. That is what is written: “Grant your servant an understanding heart” (I Kings 3:9). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You requested wisdom and did not request wealth, glory, or the lives of your enemies; therefore, wisdom and knowledge are given to you, and thereby, I will grant you wealth, property, and glory as well.’ Immediately, “Solomon awoke and behold, a dream” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The dream was upheld:2The phrase “and behold, a dream” is interpreted to mean that when Solomon awoke he understood that the dream was real and was being fulfilled. A bird would tweet and he would know what it was tweeting about, a donkey would bray, and he would know what it was braying about. Immediately, “he came to Jerusalem and he stood before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and he sacrificed burnt offerings and he prepared peace offerings and he made a feast for all his servants” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: From here [it is derived] that one makes a feast when completing the Torah.3The Torah includes all wisdom. Immediately, the Divine Spirit rested upon him and he composed these three books: Proverbs, Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes; that is what is written: “The words of Kohelet, son of David.”
Another matter, “the words of Kohelet, son of David” – three prophets, because their prophecies were matters of rebuke, their prophecy is attributed to them. These are: “The words of Kohelet”; “the words of Amos” (Amos 1:1); “the words of Jeremiah” (Jeremiah 1:1).4This stands in contrast to, for example, the beginning of the book of Joel, which states: “The word of the Lord that came to Joel son of Petuel.” God does not attach His name to negative matters.Why was his name called Jeremiah? It is because in his days, Jerusalem became desolate [irmeia]. Amos, why was his name called Amos? Rabbi Pinḥas said: It is because his tongue was encumbered [amus]. The people of his generation said: The Holy One blessed be He overlooked all His creations and rested His Divine Presence only on this stutterer with a severed tongue? Kohelet, why was his name called Kohelet? It is because his words were stated in an assembly [hak’hel], as it says: “Then Solomon assembled” (I Kings 8:1). Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rav Huna: One group would enter as another group was exiting, to hear Solomon’s wisdom. That is what the queen of Sheba said to him: “Happy are your people, happy are these servants of yours” (I Kings 10:8), and it is written: “There came from all the peoples to hear Solomon’s wisdom” (I Kings 5:14).He was called by three names: Yedidya, Kohelet, Solomon. Rabbi Yehoshua says seven: Agur, Yakeh, Lemuel, Itiel.5In addition to Yedidya, Kohelet, and Solomon. Shmuel said: The most primary and authentic among them are Yedidya, Kohelet, Solomon. Rabbi Shmuel concedes regarding these [other] four, but they were epithets given to Solomon, and they were given to be expounded: Agur, as he was filled [agur] with matters of Torah. Yakeh, as he would expel [heki] his words, like this basin that at times is full and at times is emptied; so, Solomon, at times he studied Torah and at times he would forget it.6This was when his heart strayed from following God. Lemuel, as he spoke [nam] to God [El] in his heart and said: I can increase7Horses, wives, and money, see Deuteronomy 17:16–17. and not sin. Itiel, as he said: God is with me [iti El] and I am able.8To marry numerous women.“Son of David” – king, son of a king, wise man, son of a wise man, a righteous man, son of a righteous man, a nobleman, son of a nobleman.Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Alexandri: This ox, until its tendons are cut, it can be suspended by even one tendon. Once its tendons are cut, numerous ropes and numerous nails are needed to suspend it. So too, until Solomon sinned, he would depend on his own merit, but once he sinned, he was dependent on the merit of his fathers; that is what is written: “[However, I will not tear away the entire kingdom; I will give one tribe to your son] for the sake of David, My servant” (I Kings 11:13). Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Happy is one who was privileged to reign in a place of royalty. There it is written: “[Og, king of Bashan,] who dwelled in Ashtarot in Edre’i” (Deuteronomy 1:4), but here, “king in Jerusalem,” in a place of royalty.

Section: Lamentations_Rabbah
“How does the greatly crowded city sit alone? She has become like a widow. Great among the nations, a princess among the states: She has become a vassal” (Lamentations 1:1).“How [eikha] does…sit [alone].” Three prophesied with the term eikha: Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. Moses said: “How [eikha] can I bear alone…” (Deuteronomy 1:12). Isaiah said: “How [eikha] did [the faithful city] become a harlot?” (Isaiah 1:21). Jeremiah said: “How [eikha] does [the greatly crowded city] sit alone?” Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a noblewoman who had three friends. One saw her in her tranquility, one saw her in her debauchery, and one saw her in her disgrace. So, Moses saw them in their glory and their tranquility and said: “How [eikha] can I bear alone your troubles?” Isaiah saw them in their debauchery and said: “How [eikha] did [the faithful city] become a harlot?” Jeremiah saw them in their disgrace and said: “How [eikha] does [the greatly crowded city] sit [alone]?”They asked ben Azai, saying to him: ‘Our teacher, expound for us one matter from the scroll of Lamentations.’ He said to them: ‘Israel was exiled only after they denied the Unique One of the world, circumcision that was given after twenty generations, the Ten Commandments, the five books of the Torah; the numerical value of eikha.’1Alef—the Unique One of the world; yod—the Ten Commandments; kaf—twenty generations; heh—five books of Moses.Rabbi Levi said: Israel was exiled only after they denied the thirty-six instances of karet in the Torah and the Ten Commandments, the numerical value of “how does…sit solitary [eikha yasheva badad]?”2Eikha: Alef  -1,  yod – 10, kaf – 20, heh – 5 = 36. Badad: Beit – 2, dalet – 4, dalet – 4 = 10.Rabbi Berekhya [said] in the name of Rabbi Avdimai of Haifa: [This is analogous] to a king who had a son. When he would perform his father’s will, [the king] would clothe him in fine silk, and when he would not perform his will, he would clothe him in the garments of an olive-press worker [badad]. So too Israel, as long as they would perform the will of the Holy One blessed be He, it is written: “I clothed you in embroidery” (Ezekiel 16:10). Rabbi Sima said: Purple garments. Onkelos translated: Embroidered garments. But when they do not perform the will of the Holy One blessed be He, He clothes them in the garments of olive-press workers. That is what is written: “How does…sit solitary [badad]?”Rav Naḥman said that Shmuel said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: The Holy One blessed be He summoned the ministering angels and said to them: ‘A flesh and blood king, when a relative of his dies and he mourns, what does he typically do?’ They said to Him: ‘He hangs sackcloth on his entrance.’ He said to them: ‘I, too, will do so.’ That is what is written: “I clothe the heavens in blackness and I place sackcloth as their garment” (Isaiah 50:3). ‘A flesh and blood king, what [else] does he typically do?’ They said to Him: ‘He extinguishes the lamps.’ He said to them: ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “The sun and the moon darkened and the stars withdrew their shining” (Joel 4:15). ‘A flesh and blood king, what does he typically do?’ ‘He overturns the beds.’ ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “Until thrones were set in place and the Ancient One sat” (Daniel 7:9), [implying,] as it were, that they had been overturned.3Beds were a general term for anything one would sit on. The fact that the thrones, in this verse, were set in place, implies that previously they had been overturned as a sign of mourning. ‘A flesh and blood king, what does he typically do?’ ‘He walks barefoot.’ ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “His path is in tempest and in storm, and clouds are the dust of His feet” (Nahum 1:3). ‘A flesh and blood king, what does he typically do?’ ‘He rends his purple garments.’ ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “The Lord accomplished what He devised; He implemented [bitza] His statement [emrato]” (Lamentations 2:17). Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanan explained it: What is bitza emrato? It is that He rent His purple garments.4The word rent, or tear, in Aramaic, biza, is similar to bitza. The word emrato is spelled the same as imrato, which in rabbinic parlance means the edge of one’s garment (Matnot Kehuna). ‘A flesh and blood king, what does he typically do?’ ‘He sits in silence.’ ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “Let him sit alone and be silent” (Lamentations 3:28). ‘A flesh and blood king, what does he typically do?’ ‘He sits and weeps.’ ‘That is what I will do,’ as it is stated: “The Lord, God of hosts, called on that day for weeping and for lamentation and for baldness” (Isaiah 22:12).Another matter: Eikha, Jeremiah said to them: ‘What did you see in idol worship that you are so enthusiastic to follow it? If it had a mouth to engage in debate, we would have said this.5We would have proven the falseness of idolatry and the idols themselves would have had to concur. The word eikha is being interpreted as two words: Ei, ka, “if…this” (Etz Yosef). Instead, we will speak of it and we will speak of Him.’ We will speak of it, “So said the Lord: Do not learn the way of the nations, and from the signs of the heavens do not be frightened, though the nations are frightened by them” (Jeremiah 10:2). We will speak of Him: “Tell them this: The gods who did not make the heavens and the earth shall vanish from the earth and from under these heavens. [He makes the earth with His might]” (Jeremiah 10:11–12). “The Portion of Jacob is not like these, for He is the one who forms everything, and Israel is the tribe of His inheritance, the Lord of hosts is His name” (Jeremiah 10:16).Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: The term eikha is nothing other than an expression of reproof. That is what is written: “How [eikha] can you say: We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us...”? (Jeremiah 8:8). Rabbi Neḥemya says: The term eikha is nothing other than an expression of lamentation. That is what is written: “The Lord God called to the man, and said to him: Where are you [ayeka]?” (Genesis 3:9), woe are you [oy lekha]. When was the scroll of Lamentations composed? Rabbi Yehuda says: It was composed in the days of Yehoyakim.6This was before the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. This is consistent with Rabbi Yehuda’s view that the term eikha is a term of reproof. In his view, Lamentations, or Eikha, was composed as a warning before the destruction. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: ‘Does one weep over the dead before he dies? Rather, when was it composed? After the destruction of the Temple. This is its solution: “How [eikha] does…sit solitary?”’7This phrase implies that Jerusalem was already desolate.
“The greatly crowded city,” Rabbi Shmuel taught: There were twenty-four thoroughfares in Jerusalem, each and every thoroughfare had twenty-four streets, each and every street had twenty-four market streets, each and every market street had twenty-four store streets, each and every store street had twenty-four courtyards, each and every courtyard had twenty-four houses, and each and every courtyard would have twice the number of those who departed from Egypt emerging from it.Know that it is so, as Rabbi Elazar said: There was an incident involving a traveler who was ascending to Jerusalem who took with him two hundred camels laden with pepper. He passed Tyre and found a certain tailor who was sitting near the city gates. He said to him: ‘What are you carrying?’ He said to him: ‘Pepper.’ He said to him: ‘Will you not give me a bit?’ He said to him: ‘No.’8The tailor asked to purchase a small amount, but the traveler wanted to sell his entire stock to one customer. He said to him: ‘Then you will have a purchaser only in another city.’ When he arrived in Jerusalem, he found a certain tailor sitting at the gate of the walls, who said to him: ‘What are you carrying?’ He said to him: ‘Continue your cutting.’ He found another tailor who said to him: ‘What are you carrying?’ He said to him: ‘Continue your sewing.’ He said to him: ‘If I can purchase them, fine. But if not, I will bring you a person who can purchase all of them.’ He said to him [again]: ‘What are you carrying?’ He said to him: ‘Pepper.’ He took him and brought him into a certain courtyard and he showed him a kor of dinars. He said to him: ‘Look at these coins. If they are currency in your land, take from them.’ In the morning, [the visiting merchant] went to stroll in the marketplace and one of his friends encountered him. He said to him: ‘What are you carrying?’ He said to him: ‘Pepper.’ He said to him: ‘Do you not have any that you could give me for one hundred dinars, for I have a feast today!’ He said: ‘I already sold it to so and so.’ He went to him. He said to him: ‘Do you have the pepper that you purchased? Give me a bit as I have a feast.’ He said to him: ‘What can I tell you? I already sold it to a certain tailor. However, I will tell him and he will give it to you.’ He went and he found it in a certain residence. Those who were in the first line [or purchasers] took one ounce each. Those who were in the second line took one-half ounce each. Those who were in the third line did not sense that there had been any at all, to realize what is stated: “The greatly crowded city.”If you wish to ascertain how many multitudes there were in Jerusalem, you can ascertain it from the priests. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin [said] in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: [This is analogous] to a pile of grain that was located in the grain marketplace. Everyone came to measure it but could not. There was one clever man there. He said to them: ‘If you seek to measure it, you can calculate it on the basis of its teruma.’ So too, if you wish to ascertain how many multitudes there were in Jerusalem, you can ascertain it from the priests. That is what is written: “Solomon slaughtered the peace-offering that he slaughtered to the Lord, cattle, twenty-two thousand, and of the flock, one hundred and twenty thousand” (I Kings 8:63). And we have learned: A bull is sacrificed by twenty-four [priests] and a ram by eleven.9Mishna Yoma 2:7. The reference is to the number of priests who participated in all the rituals involved in the sacrifice of these offerings.That is what is said of the first Temple. However, in the second Temple, one time King Agrippa sought to ascertain the number of the multitudes that were in Jerusalem. He said to the priests: ‘Set aside for me one kidney from each and every paschal offering.’ They set aside six hundred thousand pairs of kidneys, twice the number of those who departed from Egypt, and there was not any paschal offering that did not have more than ten registrants.10One had to register in advance for a paschal offering, and such offerings were generally divided between numerous individuals. Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: Even forty and even fifty. Bar Kappara said: Even one hundred, [and this is] not including one who was impure or on a distant journey. One time, they entered the Temple Mount and it could not hold them. There was one elderly man there and they trampled him. They called that Passover the Passover of the crushed, because they crushed the elderly man.How did Israel procreate? A person would marry off his son at the age of twelve to a woman fit to bear children. He would then marry off his grandson at the age of twelve. One would not reach the age of twenty-six until he saw children of his children, to realize what is stated: “May you see the children of your children. Peace to Israel” (Psalms 128:6).
“She has become like a widow.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: They did not go to extremes vis-à-vis the attribute of justice, and the attribute of justice did not go to extremes in their regard.11They did not sin in an extreme fashion and they were not punished in an extreme fashion (see Matnot Kehuna; Maharzu). They did not go to extremes vis-à-vis the attribute of justice, as it is stated: “The people were like complainers” (Numbers 11:1). “Complainers” is not written here, but rather, “like complainers.” “The princes of Judah were like those who move boundaries” (Hosea 5:10). “Those who move boundaries” is not written here, but rather, “like those who move boundaries.” “For like a wayward cow [Israel has strayed]” (Hosea 4:16), “For a [wayward] cow” is not written here, but rather, “like a wayward cow.” The attribute of justice, too, did not go to extremes in their regard. “She has become like a widow”—“A widow” is not written here, but rather, “like a widow”—like a woman whose husband went to a country overseas and plans to return to her. “He drew His bow like an enemy” (Lamentations 2:4), “enemy” is not written here, but rather, “like an enemy.” “The Lord was like an enemy” (Lamentations 2:5), “enemy” is not written here, but rather, “like an enemy.”Another matter, “she has become like a widow.” Rabbi Ḥama bar Ukeva and the Rabbis, Rabbi Ḥama bar Ukeva said: [This is analogous] to a widow who was demanding her sustenance but was not demanding her marriage contract.12After a man’s death, his widow may choose to continue to live in his home and to be supported by his estate. She may also leave and demand payment of the sum specified in her marriage contract. Israel is compared here to a widow who chooses to be supported by her late husband’s estate rather than leaving and cutting all ties to her husband. The Rabbis said: [This is analogous] to a king who grew angry at the queen and wrote her a bill of divorce and then snatched it from her. Any time that she sought to marry another, he would say to her: ‘Where is your bill of divorce?’ Any time she would demand her sustenance, he would say to her: ‘Have I not already divorced you?’ So too, any time Israel would seek to engage in idol worship, the Holy One blessed be He would say to them: “Where is your mother’s bill of divorce?” (Isaiah 50:1). Any time they request that He perform miracles on their behalf, the Holy One blessed be He says to them: ‘I have already divorced you.’ That is what is written: “I sent her away and gave her bill of divorce to her” (Jeremiah 3:8).Another matter, “she has become like a widow.” Rabbi Akiva and the Rabbis, Rabbi Akiva says: “Widow,” and you say “like a widow”? Rather, a widow from the Ten Tribes, but not a widow from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.13Rabbi Akiva is asserting that Jerusalem is described as a widow from the Ten Tribes but not from Judah and Benjamin, because he holds that Lamentations was composed before Judah and Benjamin were exiled (Matnot Kehuna). Alternatively, because he holds that the Ten Tribes are not destined to return, but Judah and Benjamin will eventually return (Maharzu).  The Rabbis say: A widow from these and from those, but not from the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “For neither Israel nor Judah is widowed from its God” (Jeremiah 51:5).
“Great [rabati] among the nations,” but was it not already stated [in the verse]: “greatly [rabati] crowded”? Why does the verse say: “Great [rabati] among the nations”? It means great in intellect. Rabbi Huna [said] in the name of Rabbi Yosei: In any province to which one of the residents of Jerusalem would go, they would offer a seat of honor for him to sit upon so they could hear his wisdom.An individual from Jerusalem went to a province, and the time arrived for him to die. He summoned his landlord and deposited his belongings with him. He said to him: ‘If my son comes from Jerusalem and performs three wise deeds, give him what is mine. If not, do not give him what is mine.’They14The residents of the province mentioned above. made an agreement between them that none of them would show another’s house to a visitor. He [the individual from Jerusalem] died and he passed to his eternal home. Some time later, his son came. When he entered the gate of the wall of that province, he saw one carrying a bundle of wood. He said: ‘Are you selling the bundle of wood?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ ‘Take its price from me and take it to so-and-so.’ He took its price and took it to so-and-so. He was going and [the deceased man’s son] was following him until he reached his residence. He said to him:15The wood seller said to the landlord. ‘Hey, so-and-so, come take a bundle of wood.’ He said to him: ‘Did I tell you to bring me a bundle of wood?’ He said to him: ‘True, you did not tell me, but it belongs to this person who followed me.’ Immediately, he opened his house before him, and they greeted one another. That is one [wise] deed.He said to him: ‘Who are you?’ He said: ‘I am the son of the man who died in your [house].’ He brought him in and prepared a cooked meal for him. That man16The landlord. had two sons and two daughters. When the time of the meal arrived, they brought before him for the meal five cooked pullets. When they were ready to eat, he said to him:17The host said to the guest. ‘Take and distribute it.’ He [the guest] said to him: ‘It is not mine.’ He [the host] said to him: ‘I want you to take and distribute it.’ He took and distributed it, and placed one pullet between the man and his wife. He took the second pullet and placed it between the two men who were his two sons. He took the third and placed it between his two daughters. He took two pullets and placed them before himself. He ate them and they did not say anything to him. This is the second [wise] deed.18It will be explained below why the guest did this and why it was considered a wise deed.At evening time, [the host] brought a fattened chicken for the meal. He said to [the guest]: ‘Take and distribute it.’ He said to him: ‘It is not mine.’ He said to him: ‘Take and distribute it, as that is my will.’ He took and distributed it and placed the head before the man. He took the innards and placed it before his wife. He took the two thighs and gave them to his two sons. He took the two wings and gave them to his two daughters. He took the entire body and placed it before himself. This is the third [wise] deed.[The landlord] said: ‘Is this how they distribute in your place? You distributed the first time and I did not say anything to you, and now you do this?’ He said to him: ‘Did I not say to you that it is not mine? Nonetheless, what I have distributed, I distributed properly. The first time, you brought five pullets for the meal. You, your wife, and the pullet equal three. Your two sons and the pullet equal three. Your two daughters and the pullet equal three. I and the two pullets equal three. Did I take anything from your portions? Now, you brought a chicken. I took the head and gave it to you, as you are the head of the household. I took the innards and placed them before your wife, because children emerge from her innards. I took the two thighs and placed them before your two sons, because they are the pillars of the house. I took the two wings and placed them before your daughters, as tomorrow they will depart, fly from your house, and go to their husbands. I took this ship,19When the body of the chicken without the extremities  is cut open it resembles a ship. as I came in a ship and I will go in a ship. Rise and give me what is mine that my father deposited with you, and I will leave immediately.’ He gave him what was his and he went in peace. That is what is stated: “Great among the nations,” great in intellect.Four Jerusalemites came to Athens and were received by a certain person. In the evening he made a feast for them. After they ate and drank, he prepared four beds for them. One of them was broken and supported by the next one. When they got up from the feast to go to sleep, he said: ‘I heard that the residents of Jerusalem are extremely wise, let me hear some of what they are saying.’ He went and slept in [a room] adjacent to theirs.The one who was sleeping on the broken bed awoke during the night and said to the others: ‘What do you think, that I am sleeping on a bed? I am sleeping on the ground but I am suspended.’ Another said to them: ‘The meat that we ate this evening had the taste of dog.’ Another said to them: ‘And the wine that we drank tonight had the taste of a grave.’ Another said to them: ‘You are wondering about those [matters]? The man who is the homeowner is not even the son of his father.’When the man heard these matters, he said: ‘One is true and three are false.’ He arose in the morning and went to the butcher. He said to him: ‘Give me from the meat that you gave me last night.’ He said to him: ‘I have none.’ He said to him: ‘What was special about it?’ He said to him: ‘We had one lamb that was a suckling and its mother died. We had a female dog and the lamb suckled from it. At night, we were short on meat and I sought to bring some. I did not have any other, so I gave you from that [lamb].’ He said: ‘Two are true and two are false.’He went to the winemaker. He said to him: ‘Give me some of that wine that you gave me last night.’ He said to him: ‘I have none.’ He said to him: ‘What was special about it?’ He said to him: ‘We had one vine and it was planted over our father’s grave. I squeezed it and placed it in wicker baskets. I was short on wine and I sought to bring some. I did not have any other, so I gave you from that [vine].’ He said: ‘Three are true and one is false.’He went to his mother and said to her: ‘Whose son am I?’ She said to him: ‘My son, you are the son of your father.’ He said to her: ‘Tell me the truth, whose son am I, and if not I will sever your head.’ She said to him: ‘My son, your father was unable to beget children and I feared lest his relatives take my property.20After his death, as the wife was not considered an heir. Did I perform a sin that I went and engaged in an illicit relationship and brought you into all this wealth and property?’ He said to her: ‘What do we see here? Will the residents of Jerusalem come and render us illegitimate? Let us agree among ourselves that we will not receive any one of them.’
A certain Jerusalemite went to see a merchant in Athens. He was put up in an inn. He found people who were beginning to sit and drink wine. After he ate and drank, he sought to sleep there. They said to him: ‘We agreed among ourselves that we will not receive any person as a lodger until he performs three jumps.’ He said to them: ‘I do not know how you jump. Get up and perform it before me, and I will perform it like you after you.’ One of them stood, jumped, and found himself in the middle of the inn. He performed another jump and found himself at the gate at the entrance of the inn. He performed another jump and found himself outside.21All those inside followed the jumper outside to watch him. [The Jerusalemite] stood and bolted the gate in their faces. He said to them: ‘By your lives, what you sought to do to me, I did to you.’
An Athenian came to Jerusalem and encountered a certain child. He gave him coins and said to him: ‘Go bring me figs and grapes.’ He said to him: ‘Well done, you with your coins and me with my feet.’22We are partners in the fruit, as each of us will have contributed to gathering them. When [the child] returned, [the Athenian] said to him: ‘Take it and divide it.’ The child took it and placed before himself the bad ones and he took the good ones and placed them before that man. He said: ‘It is true what they say, that the residents of Jerusalem are extremely wise. It is because he knew that he did not give any coins of his own that he took the bad ones for himself and he placed the good ones before this man. But let us draw lots. If I go and yours comes to me, I will take what is before you. If what is before me comes to you, you will take it.’ They did so together,23They wrote their names on two lots, mixed them up, and each drew a lot. and [the child] took what [the Athenian] had.24The child took what the Athenian had.
An Athenian came to Jerusalem and encountered a certain child. He gave him coins and said to him: ‘Go and bring me something so that I can eat, be sated, and have leftovers to take on the road.’ He went and brought him salt. He said to him: ‘Did I tell you to bring me salt?’ He said to him: ‘Did you not say to me: Go and bring me something so that I can eat, be sated, and have leftovers to take on the road? By your life, there is enough here for you to eat, be sated, and have leftovers to take on the road.’25The money he had received was not nearly enough to purchase the quantity of food the Athenian had asked for. The child therefore bought salt, which was inexpensive. There was enough salt to use together with a satisfying meal and to have leftovers for the journey (Etz Yosef).
An Athenian came to Jerusalem and found a discarded mortar. He took it and brought it to a tailor. He said to him: ‘Sew this broken mortar for me.’ [The tailor] took out a handful of sand and said to him: ‘Spin threads for me and I will sew it.’26Just as one cannot spin thread from sand, one cannot sew together a broken mortar. See Etz Yosef and Rabbi David Luria, who interpret this passage allegorically as a debate as to whether Israel can again experience redemption.
An Athenian came to Jerusalem and encountered a certain child. He gave him coins and said to him: ‘Go and bring me eggs and cheese.’ When [the child] returned, [the Athenian] said to him: ‘Show me which is the cheese from a white goat and which is from a black goat.’ [The child] said to him: ‘You are an elderly man. You show me which is an egg from a white chicken and which is from a black one.’27Rabbi David Luria interprets this allegorically: The Athenian argued that although the Jews used to be distinct from the gentiles due to their religious beliefs and conducts, they had become indistinguishable, just as cheeses from a black goat and a white goat are indistinguishable. The child answered that the correct metaphor is the eggs from a black chicken and a white chicken. Even if they look the same, their potential is vastly different, and when their chicks hatch, that difference will become evident to all.
An Athenian came to Jerusalem and encountered a certain priest. He said to him: ‘How much smoke does a bundle of wood produce? He said to him: ‘When it is wet, it all becomes smoke. When it is dry, one-third becomes smoke, one-third ashes, and one-third is consumed by the fire.’ From where did he learn this? From the wood of the arrangement [on the Temple altar].
An Athenian came to Jerusalem. He entered a school and found children sitting there but their teacher was not there with them. He was asking them questions and they would respond. They said to him: ‘Let us agree between us that whoever asks a question and defeats his counterpart, they will take his garments.’ He said to them: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘You, who are residents of this place, should be first.’ They said to him: ‘You respond first because you are an elderly man.’ They said to him: ‘These items, what are they? Nine exit, eight enter, two pour, one drinks, and twenty-four are attendants.’ He could not respond and they took his garments. He came to Rabbi Yoḥanan, their teacher. He said to him: ‘Alas, rabbi, there is this great evil in your midst, that when a person comes as a visitor among you, you take his garments.’ He said to him: ‘Is it, perhaps, that they said something to you and you were unable to respond to them, and they took your garments?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘What did they say to you?’ He said to him: ‘Such and such they said to me.’ He said to him: ‘My son, nine exit, these are the months of a child in the womb. Eight enter, these are the eight days of circumcision. Two pour, these are the two breasts, both of which pour. One drinks, this is the baby who was born. Twenty-four attendants, these are the twenty-four months of nursing.’ Immediately, he came, responded to them, and took his garments. They read in his regard: “Had you not ploughed with my calf, you would not have solved my riddle” (Judges 14:18).
An Athenian came to Jerusalem. He devoted three and a half years to learn the language of wisdom,28Scholars would speak in riddles that could not be understood by the average person (see Eruvin 54a). That style of communication is referred to here as the language of wisdom. but he did not learn it. After three and a half years he purchased a slave who was blind.29He was blind in one eye. He said: ‘After three and one years, I buy a blind slave?’30He was upset that after devoting so much time to wisdom he could not even protect himself from purchasing a slave who had an obvious handicap (Etz Yosef). [The slave] said to him: ‘By your life, he is very wise and sees far.’ When they exited the city walls, [the slave] said to him: ‘Hurry so we can catch up to the caravan.’ He said to [the slave]: ‘Is there a caravan before us?’ [The slave] said to him: ‘Yes, and there is before us a female camel that is blind on one side, there are two in its womb, and it is laden with two leather flasks, one of wine and one of vinegar. It is at a distance of [no more than] four mil and its camel driver is a gentile.’ He said to [the slave]: ‘You of a stiff-necked people, with one eye, how do you know that it is blind in one eye?’ He said to him: ‘Look, one side of the road is grazed and one is not grazed.’ ‘And how do you know that it has two in the womb?’ He said to him: ‘It lay down and I saw the imprint of both of them.’ He said to him: ‘How do you know that it is laden with two leather flasks, one of wine and one of vinegar?’ He said to him: ‘From the drips; wine is absorbed, vinegar bubbles.’ ‘How do you know that the camel driver with them [is gentile]?’ ‘Because he urinated in the middle of the road, and a Jew does not urinate in the middle of the road, but rather on the side.’ ‘How do you know that it is at a distance of four mil?’ He said to him: ‘Until [the time it takes to travel] four mil, the hoofprint of the camel are distinct, from then on, it is not distinct.’
An Athenian came to Jerusalem, and he greatly mocked the residents of Jerusalem. They said: ‘Who will go and bring him to us?’ One person said to them: ‘I will go and I will bring him with his head shaved.’ The Jerusalemite went to Athens and was received by that man. In the morning, the two of them went out to stroll in the marketplace. One of [the Jew’s] sandals tore. He said to the cobbler: ‘Take this coin31It was a valuable coin. and repair this sandal.’ He repaired it for him. The following day, the two of went out to stroll in the marketplace and [the Jew’s] other sandal tore. He said to him:32He said to his Athenian host. ‘Take this coin and go have the cobbler repair this sandal of mine.’ He said to him: ‘Are sandals so expensive in your place?’33Is that the reason you came with tattered sandals, and are willing to pay so much to repair them? He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘How many dinars?’ He said to him: ‘Some are nine and some are ten dinars, and when they are inexpensive, some are seven and some are eight dinars.’ He said to him: ‘If I come to you with this merchandise will you sell it for me?’ He said to him: ‘Yes, but do not enter the city without my knowledge.’When [the Athenian] performed his labor he purchased a stock of sandals. He travelled, ascended to Jerusalem, and sat at the gate of the city walls. He sent after [the Jew] and he came. When [the Jew] came, he said to [the Athenian]: ‘We made an agreement among us that no person may enter to sell his merchandise unless his head is shaved and his face blackened.’ He said to him: ‘What harm is there to me if I shave my head, provided that I sell my merchandise.’ After he shaved his head, [the Jew] took him and seated him in the middle of the marketplace. When a person would come to purchase sandals from him, he would say to him: ‘How much does a pair of these sandals cost?’ [The Athenian] would say to him: ‘Some are ten and some are nine dinars; however, I will not take less than eight dinars.’ When [the purchaser] would hear this, he would knock him on his head with a sandal, go, and not make the purchase. He said to [the Jew]: ‘Did I treat you so badly when you were in my place?’ He said to him: ‘From now on, do not mock [tefalei] the residents of Jerusalem.’ <Tefalei is a term meaning examination. The verse: “You shall not examine branches again” (Deuteronomy 24:20), is translated as lo tefalei aḥarekha.>34This linguistic note, which is added to the text of the midrash, employs the term examination in the sense of critique.
A certain Cuthite passed himself off as an interpreter of dreams. Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei heard and said: Shall I not go and see this foolish Cuthite who deceives people? He went and he sat alongside him. Someone came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream an olive tree irrigated by oil.’ The Cuthite said to him: ‘The olive tree is light and the oil is light, you will see light in great light.’ Rabbi Yishmael said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he has known his mother’ <meaning, he had relations with his mother>.35Rabbi Yishmael cursed the Cuthite dream interpreter and gave a more accurate interpretation of the dream.Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that one of my eyes swallowed its counterpart.’ That man said to him: ‘You will see light in great light.’ Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he has two children and one of them was intimate with his counterpart.’Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that I swallowed a certain star.’ That man said to him: ‘You will see great light. The star is light and you are light [nehor].36Your name is Nehora. That is light on light.’ Rabbi Yishmael said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he killed a Jew.’ From where did Rabbi Yishmael derive this? It is from this verse: “Look now to the heavens and count the stars…[so shall your seed be]” (Genesis 15:5).Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that I had three eyes.’ That man said to him: ‘You will see great light.’ Rabbi Yishmael said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he is a baker, two are his and one is the oven’s.’37There were circular openings for pots at the top of the oven, which resemble eyes.Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream four ears and all the people heeding my words.’ He said to him: ‘You will be greatly heeded.’ Rabbi Yishmael said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he is a gathererer of thorns, and when he is laden with them, all the people flee from before him.’Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that I was carrying a ledger with twenty-four pages, on which there was writing on this side and erasures on that side, writing on this side and erasures on that side.’ He said to him: ‘That man will rise to prominence and his business will thrive and he will write on this side and erase on that side, write on this side and erase on that side.’38The Cuthite told the man that he would have success in business and need to continually write down his new transactions. Rabbi Yishmael said to him: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he has a garment with twenty-four patches. He sews one from here and it rips from here.’Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that I was carrying a stalk with a bundle of lettuce on it.’ He said to him: ‘That man will ascend to prominence.’ Rabbi Yishmael said: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he has a storehouse of wine and all of it became vinegar. Everyone will come and take some in a jug made of gourds, to pickle their lettuce in it.’Another man came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream the entire world pointing at me with their fingers.’ He said to him: ‘That man will ascend to prominence and all the people will point at you with their fingers.’ Rabbi Yishmael said: ‘Pay me my fee, and I will interpret it for you.’ He said to him: ‘It is already interpreted.’ Another time he said to him: ‘I saw that everyone was blowing at me with their cheeks and gesturing to me with their fingers.’ He said to him: ‘That man will ascend to prominence and all the people will laud you with their cheeks.’ Rabbi Yishmael said: ‘May the soul of that man expire; he has a storehouse of wheat. When they were pointing at him with their fingers, it was because [water] was dripping onto them. When they were blowing at him with their cheeks, it is because they were swollen.39From fermentation. When they were gesturing at you with their fingers, it is because they were growing vegetation, and that man will not receive any [benefit] from them.’
A certain Cuthite said: ‘I will go and see a certain Jewish elder40Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei. who mocks people.’ He came and sat near him. He said to him: ‘I saw in my dream four cedars, four sycamores, and a bundle of straw, and a bull was riding upon them.’ Rabbi Yishmael said: ‘May the soul of that man expire; the four cedars are four cedar bedposts, the four sycamores are four bed sideboards, the bundle of straw, those are its ropes.41Beds commonly consisted of a frame composed of four boards with posts at the corners, held together by ropes. A leather covering would be stretched over the frame, and served as the mattress. A bull riding upon them, that is the leather of the bed upon which you sleep. This man will climb onto it and never come down.’ And so it was for him.Another came and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream an olive tree at the time of its planting.’ He said to him: ‘This man will see great light.’ Another came and said to him: ‘I saw an olive tree at the time of its beating.’42During harvesting, workers would beat the olive tree so that its fruit would fall from the tree. He said to him: ‘This man should prepare his loins for lashes.’ He said to him: ‘Rabbi, to that one you said that and to me you said this?’ He said to him: ‘May the soul of this man expire; that man saw at the time of planting and this one at the time of beating.’
One of the students of Rabbi Yoḥanan was sitting before him. [Rabbi Yoḥanan] explained [the lesson] to him but he did not understand it. [Rabbi Yoḥanan] said to him: ‘Why do you not understand?’ He said to him: ‘I saw three harsh matters last night and I do not know what they mean.’ He said: ‘Tell me what they were.’ He said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that they were saying to me: In Adar you will die, you will not see Nisan, and you will sow but you will not reap.’ He said to him: ‘All three of them are good. You will die in Adar – you will die with the glory of Torah <meaning, you will exert great effort>.43You will attain glory [hadar] due to your accomplishments in Torah, and it will last your entire life. Alternatively, death is interpreted here as meaning that he will toil with all his effort in Torah study (see Berakhot 63b). You will not see Nisan – you will not see ordeals [nisyonin]. You will sow but you will not reap – what you begat, you will not bury.’ Another said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that there were no breeches on my legs.’ He said to him: ‘As you live, that is not bad, but rather it is good. The festival will come and this man will not have anything.’44The man would not have any troubles (Yefe Anaf). Alternatively, he would not have enough money for food or clothing, but that was not especially bad news, as the man was already destitute. The good news was that he would be alive (Etz Yosef). From where did Rabbi Yoḥanan understand this? The word for leg [regel] is also the word for pilgrimage festival [regel].
A certain man came to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta and said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that they said to me: Arise and ascend to Cappadocia and you will take your father’s property.’45You will inherit from him. He said to him: ‘Did your father ascend to Cappadocia during his lifetime?’ He said to him: ‘No.’ He said to him: ‘Go and count twenty floor beams in your house.’46You will find your father’s treasure buried beneath the twentieth beam. He said to him: ‘There are not twenty floor beams.’ He said to him: ‘Go and count them from top to bottom and from bottom to top, and in the place that the number of twenty floor beams is completed, there you will find it.’ He went and did so, found his property, and became wealthy. From where did Rabbi Yosei understand this? Cappadocia, cappa in Greek is twenty, docia in Greek are beams.
A certain woman came to Rabbi Elazar. She said to him: ‘I saw that the rafter in the house snapped.’ He said to her: ‘This woman will bear a male child.’ She went, and so it was for her. She came to ask him on another occasion and said to him: ‘The rafter in the house snapped.’ He said to her: ‘You will bear a male child.’ She went, and so it was for her. She came on another occasion for a third time. She found his students sitting in the school but their teacher was not there. She said to them: ‘Where is your teacher?’ They said to her: ‘What do you want from him?’ She said to them: ‘Perhaps you are wise enough to interpret a dream like your teacher?’ They said to her: ‘Tell it to us, what you want, and we will interpret it for you.’ She said to them: ‘I saw in my dream that the rafter of this woman’s47Referring to herself. house snapped.’ They said to her: ‘That woman will bury her husband.’ When she went out from before them, she began wailing. Rabbi Elazar heard and said to them: ‘Why is that woman wailing?’ They said to him: ‘That woman came to ask you but she did not find you.’ He said to his students: ‘What did that woman come to ask?’ They said to him: ‘The interpretation of a dream.’ He said to them: ‘What did you say to her?’ They said to him: ‘Such and such.’ He said to them: ‘You eliminated a man. Is it not written: “It was as he interpreted to us, so it was” (Genesis 41:13)? Did Rabbi Yoḥanan not say as follows: The dream follows its interpretation, except for wine, some drink it and it is good for him and some drink it and it is bad for him?’48If a Torah scholar dreams that he is drinking wine it is a good sign; if an ignoramus dreams that he is drinking wine it is a bad sign (Matnot Kehuna; see Berakhot 57a). Rabbi Abahu said: The content of dreams makes no difference.
There was an incident in which Rabbi Yehoshua was walking along the path.49This was a path through a field that was created by people traversing it. A certain person found him walking along the path and said to him: ‘What are you doing?’ He said to him: ‘I am walking along the path.’ He said to him: ‘You have spoken well that you are walking along a path, for it was trodden by robbers like you.’ He went on from there and found a certain child sitting at a fork in the road. He said to him: ‘Which road is closer to the city?’ He said to him: ‘This one is close but far, and that one is far but close.’ Rabbi Yehoshua went on the one that was close but far. When he reached the city, he found gardens and orchards surrounding the wall. He returned to that child and said to him: ‘My son, is this road, in fact, closer to the city?’ He said to him: ‘You are a Sage of Israel! Did I not say to you that this one is close but far and that one is far but close?’ At that moment, Rabbi Yehoshua said: ‘Happy are you Israel that you are all wise, from your old to your young.’50Rabbi Yehoshua admitted that he was bested by the man in the field and by the boy, and he praised the Jewish people for their great wisdom.He went on from there and found a certain child with a covered vessel in his hand. He said to him: ‘What do you have in your hand, covered within this vessel?’ He said: ‘Had my mother wanted you to know what I have with me, she would have not told me to cover it.’ He went on from there and found a certain child and said to him: ‘What is the quality of the water of this city?’ He said to him: ‘Why do you care? The garlic and the onions are plentiful.’ When he entered the city, he found a girl standing and filling [her pitcher] from the spring. He said to her: ‘Give me water to drink.’ She said to him: ‘To you and to your donkey.’ After he drank and turned to go, he said to her: ‘My daughter, you have acted like Rebecca.’ She said to him: ‘I have acted like Rebecca, but you have not acted like Eliezer.’51After Rebecca drew water for the servant of Abraham (identified by the Sages as Eliezer), and for his camels, he gave her jewelry (Genesis 24:22).It is taught: One leaves a portion from food cooked in a pot, but one does not leave a portion from food cooked in a stew pot.52A similar statement in Eruvin 53 reads: “One does not leave a portion from the pot but one leaves a portion from the plate.” Rashi explains that the waiter was expected to serve all the food that was cooked, but participants at the meal were expected to leave over some of the food that was served. These leftovers would be eaten by the waiter. There was an incident where Rabbi Yehoshua was hosted by a widowed woman. The first day she brought him a cooked item and he ate it and did not leave a portion for her. The second day she brought him a cooked item and he ate it and did not leave a portion for her. On the third day, she oversalted a cooked dish of pounded grain. After Rabbi Yehoshua tasted it, he withdrew his hand from it. She said to him: ‘Rabbi, why did you withdraw your hand from this pounded grain?’ He said to her: ‘I already ate earlier in the day.’ She said to him: ‘If you ate earlier in the day, why did you not mimimize the bread, just as you minimized this pounded grain? Perhaps you left a portion. From the two cooked items that you ate, why did you not leave a portion like you did from this pounded grain?’ At that moment, Rabbi Yehoshua said: ‘In all my days, no person has ever gotten the best of me except for this widow, a young girl, and those children, to realize what is stated: “Great among the nations,” great in intellect.
“A princess among the nations,” Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Because Israel violated the terms that they accepted at Sinai, therefore, “she has become a vassal [lamas].” Sinai is lamas, the numerical value of this equals the numerical value of that.53Sinai: samekh – 60, yod – 10, nun – 50, yod – 10 = 130. Lamas: Lamed – 30, mem – 30, samekh – 60 = 130. Rabbi Yishmael bar Naḥman said: Because Israel engaged in idol worship, therefore, “she has become a vassal [lamas].” Lamas is figure [semel]. The letters of this are the letters of that.54Lamed, mem, samekh, and samekh, mem, lamed. The Rabbis say: Lamas, the melting [lemassa] of the heart.Rav Ukeva said: On the eve of the ninth of Av, Abraham entered the chamber of the Holy of Holies. The Holy One blessed be He grasped his hand and was strolling with him long and short.55He discussed with Abraham every facet of Israel’s merits and demerits in light of the impending destruction (Etz Yosef). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “What has My beloved to do in My Temple?” (Jeremiah 11:15). He said to Him: ‘Master of the universe, my children, where are they?’ He said to him: ‘They sinned and I exiled them among the nations.’ He said to Him: ‘Were there no righteous among them?’ He said to him: “She has performed her evil schemes” (Jeremiah 11:15). He said to Him: ‘You should have looked at the good ones among them.’ He said to him: ‘Most of them were wicked, as it is written: “She has performed her evil schemes with multitudes” (Jeremiah 11:15).’ He said to Him: ‘You should have looked to the circumcision in their flesh.’ He said to him: ‘As you live, they repudiated it, as it is stated: “The sacred flesh is passed from you” (Jeremiah 11:15). Moreover, these rejoiced at the downfall of those, as it is written: “When you beheld evil, then you rejoice” (Jeremiah 11:15), and it is written: “One who rejoices at calamity will not be absolved” (Proverbs 17:5).’ Why was the scroll of Lamentations stated as an alphabetical acrostic? Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda says: Because it is written: “All Israel have violated Your Torah” (Daniel 9:11), which is written [with letters] from alef through tav; therefore, the scroll was written alphabetically, one corresponding to the other.
Rabbi Neḥemya says: Although Jeremiah cursed them alphabetically in Lamentations, Isaiah preceded him and brought a remedy for each and every verse of them until: “Let all their wickedness come before You” (Lamentations 1:22).56The midrash below (chapter 23) explains this further and cites the view of the Rabbis.
“She weeps bitterly at night and her tears are on her cheeks; she has no comforter from all her lovers. All her allies have betrayed her, have become her enemies” (Lamentations 1:2).“She weeps bitterly at night.” “My tears have been my bread day and night” (Psalms 42:4). Rabbi Aḥa and the Rabbis, Rabbi Aḥa says: Just as bread is constant, so, my tears are constant. The Rabbis say: Anyone who weeps does not eat, as it is stated: “She wept and did not eat” (I Samuel 1:7).So the Holy One blessed be He said to Ezekiel: “You, son of man, prepare for yourself the tools of exile…” (Ezekiel 12:3). What are “the tools of exile”? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba and Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Ḥalafta, Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: A leather flask, a rug, and a bowl. Each and every one of them must serve two purposes: One places flour in the leather flask and places it beneath his head; one eats and drinks from a bowl; a rug is for sitting and to sleep upon. Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Ḥalafta said: A container with four handles that holds everything. Therefore, the Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: “Ezekiel will be an example to you; in accordance with everything that he has done you will do…” (Ezekiel 24:22). But they did not do so, rather, when they were exiled, one came to knead his dough but did not know with what, and he would dig in the ground and make a hole. He would knead it in it, and pebbles would stick to their dough. When he would put it in his mouth, his teeth would become dull, to realize what is stated: “He broke my teeth” (Lamentations 3:16). But I did not take all this to heart.57The midrash speaks now from the perspective of Israel. When did I take it to heart? “When they say to me all day long: Where is your God?” (Psalms 42:4).
“I remember my song in the night; I meditate with my heart, and my spirit searches” (Psalms 77:7). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Aivu.58The text of the midrash appears to be cut off. The statement of these Sages will be cited below.The Rabbis say:59This is a continuation of Chapter 21. Because they sinned from alef  through tav, they are consoled from alef through tav. Likewise, you find that for all the harsh prophecies that Jeremiah prophesied regarding Israel, Isaiah preceded him and brought a remedy for them. Jeremiah said: “How [eikha] does…sit solitary”? (Lamentations 1:1). Isaiah said: “You will say in your heart: who bore me these.” (Isaiah 49:21).60This is what Israel will say when its children return and it will no longer sit solitary. The verse stated by Jeremiah begins with the word “how” [eikha], which starts with an alef. The verse stated by Isaiah foresees the time when Jeremiah’s verse will be undone. Jeremiah said: “She weeps [bakho] bitterly at night” (Lamentations 1:2).61This verse starts with the word bakho, which begins with a bet. Isaiah said: “You will weep no longer, He will show you grace…” (Isaiah 30:19). Jeremiah said: “Judah was exiled [galta] due to affliction” (Lamentations 1:3).62In Hebrew, the first word of this verse is galta, which begins with a gimmel. Isaiah said: “He will gather the dispersed of Israel…” (Isaiah 11:12). Jeremiah said: “The ways [darkhei] of Zion are in mourning” (Lamentations 1:4). Isaiah said: “A voice calls in the wilderness, clear the way of the Lord” (Isaiah 40:3). Jeremiah said: “Her adversaries have become [hayu] the head” (Lamentations 1:5). Isaiah said: “The sons of your tormentors will come to you, bowed” (Isaiah 60:14). Jeremiah said: “Gone [vayetze] from the daughter of Zion is all [her splendor] (Lamentations 1:6). Isaiah said: “A redeemer will come to Zion” (Isaiah 59:20). Jeremiah said: “Jerusalem remembered [zakhra] […all her delights]” (Lamentations 1:7). Isaiah said: “For, behold, I am creating new heavens and a new earth and the former will not be remembered and will not come to mind” (Isaiah 65:17). Jeremiah said: “Jerusalem has comitted a sin [ḥet]” (Lamentations 1:8). Isaiah said: “I have wiped away your transgressions like a cloud” (Isaiah 44:22). Jeremiah said: “Her impurity [tumatah] is on the edges of her skirts” (Lamentations 1:9). Isaiah said: “When the Lord will have washed the filth of the daughters of Zion” (Isaiah 4:4). Jeremiah said: “The adversary extended his hand [yado]” (Lamentations 1:10). Isaiah said: “The Lord will once again show His hand” (Isaiah 11:11). Jeremiah said: “All her [kol] people are sighing, [seeking bread]…” (Lamentations 1:11). Isaiah said: “They will not hunger and they will not thirst” (Isaiah 49:10). Jeremiah said: “May it not [lo] befall you, all wayfarers” (Lamentations 1:12) Isaiah said: “Until a spirit will be poured upon us from on high” (Isaiah 32:15).63Maharzu amends the text such that the verse cited here is Isaiah 57:15, whereas Isaiah 32:15 is cited below after Lamentations 1:13. Accordingly, the midrash is understood as follows: Lamentations states “Is there any pain like my pain” (Lamentations 1:12) while Isaiah speaks of healing, as it is stated: “to revive the spirit of the humble and revive the heart of the downtrodden” (Isaiah 57:15).  Jeremiah said: “From on high [mimarom] He sent fire into my bones” (Lamentations 1:13). Isaiah said: “Exalted and holy I will rest, and the despondent…” (Isaiah 57:15).64According  to the Maharzu,the verse cited here should be Isaiah 32:15, which more directly parallels Lamentations 1:13. Jeremiah said: “The yoke of my transgressions is preserved [niskad] in His hand” (Lamentations 1:14). Isaiah said: “Undo the restraints on your neck” (Isaiah 52:2). Jeremiah said: “[The Lord] trampled [sila] all my mighty” (Lamentations 1:15). Isaiah said: “Pave [solu] the highway, clear it of stones” (Isaiah 62:10). Jeremiah said: “For [al] these I weep; […my eye sheds water]” (Lamentations 1:16). Isaiah said: “With their eyes they will see [the Lord returning to Zion]” (Isaiah 52:8). Jeremiah said: “Zion spread [persa] her hands, [there was no comforter for her]” (Lamentations 1:17). Isaiah said: “I, it is I, who am your Comforter” (Isaiah 51:12). Jeremiah said: “The Lord is righteous [tzadik]” (Lamentations 1:18). Isaiah said: “Your people they are all righteous” (Isaiah 60:21). Jeremiah said: “I called [karati] to my lovers; they deceived me” (Lamentations 1:19). Isaiah said: “You will call Your walls salvation” (Isaiah 60:18). Jeremiah said: “See [re’e], Lord, for I am in distress” (Lamentations 1:20). Isaiah said: “You will see and your heart will be gladdened” (Isaiah 66:14). Jeremiah said: “They heard [shamu] that I sigh” (Lamentations 1:21). Isaiah said: “Comfort, comfort My people” (Isaiah 40:1). Jeremiah said: “Let all their wickedness come [tavo] before You” (Lamentations 1:22) Isaiah said: “I will bring them to the mountain of My holiness” (Isaiah 56:7).Another matter, “I remember my song [neginati] in the night” (Psalms 77:7). Rabbi Aivu and Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Aivu says: The congregation of Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘I remember how I was broken before You in the night of the kingdoms,65The times during which Israel suffered persecution at the hands of foreign nations is are referred to here as night. just as it says: “Blessed is God, the Most High, who broke [migen] your enemies into your hand”’ (Genesis 14:20). Rabbi Yehuda says: I remember the songs that I sang before You in the nights, just as it says: “[The Lord is to save me] and we will play my songs all the days of our lives” (Isaiah 38:20), this is the night of Pharaoh, as it is written: “It was at midnight” (Exodus 12:29). And the night of Gideon who smote the Midianite and Amalekite camp, as it is written: “It was on that night” (Judges 7:9). And the night of Sennacherib, in whose regard it is written: “It was on that night, and the angel of God emerged” (II Kings 19:35).66According to Rabbi Yehuda, the reference is to the songs Israel sang when they experienced salvation at night. Each of the three verses cited refers to an event in which an enemy of Israel was defeated at night.“I meditate with my heart” (Psalms 77:7), I speak with my heart. “And my spirit searches” (Psalms 77:7), I examine my actions. And it says: “Will the Lord forsake forever? Will He never again appease?” (Psalms 77:8). God forbid, He has not abandoned and will not abandon, as it is written: “For the Lord will not forsake forever” (Lamentations 3:31).“Will He never again appease [lirtzot]” or be appeased [leratzot]? In the past He would appease others. When Moses was angry, it says: “And he returned [veshav] to the camp” (Exodus 33:11). Read it as: And return [veshuv].67Despite Moses’s anger in the wake of the sin of the Golden Calf, God implores him to return to the camp. When Elijah was angry, it says: “Go, return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus” (I Kings 19:15); but now, He does not appease, and is not appeased.“Has His kindness come to an end [he’afes] forever, [is His decision final for all generations]?” (Psalms 77:9). What is he’afes? Rabbi Reuven said: It is a Greek term, just as it says: “He will say none [afes]” (Amos 6:10).68The word afes is a Greek term meaning “let go,” similar to the usage of the term in Amos, where one is asked if there is anyone with him and he says “none,” meaning dismiss the thought from your mind. Thus, It is not God’s kindness that has ceased, but He has let go of it in the sense that He has ceased to implement His kindness in the world. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Ḥanina said: Has the matter that the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses, “I will favor whom I favor” (Exodus 33:19), concluded? Rabbi Simon says: It has already been concluded, and this was confirmed by means of Jeremiah: “For I have withdrawn My peace [and kindness and mercy from this people]” (Jeremiah 16:5).“Has God forgotten to be gracious [ḥanot]” (Psalms 77:10), has God forgotten His encampment [ḥanoto] in the wilderness, “According to the word of God they would encamp” (Numbers 9: 20). Has He forgotten “God, merciful and gracious [veḥanun]”? (Exodus 34:6). “Has He closed in anger His mercy? Sela” (Psalms 77:10); even though He is angry, His mercy is near. Yet Zion said: ‘The Lord has forsaken me and my Lord has forgotten me,’ as it is written: “Zion said: The Lord has forsaken me [and the Lord has forgotten me]” (Isaiah 49:14).69However, God responds: “Yet I will not forget you” (Isaiah 49:15).“Then I said: This is my weakness [ḥaloti], [the right hand of the Most High has changed]” (Psalms 77:11). Rabbi Alexandrai said: Because we did not entreat [ḥilinu] You in repentance, the right hand has changed.70The right hand signifies God’s support and giving. This has changed from supporting Israel to supporting its enemies (Etz Yosef). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: The oath that He made with us at Ḥorev71This is another name for Sinai. has been violated [nitḥalela], and so the right hand has changed.Rabbi Simon said: Have you ever heard that the orb of the sun is ill and unable to rise and serve? For His servants there are no illnesses, but before Him there is illness?72The term ḥaloti is expounded to mean illnesses [ḥolayin], such that the verse reads “this is my illness.” As the midrash explains, it cannot be that God’s providence has changed due to His illness, as that is impossible. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [This is analogous] to a mighty person who was there in a province, and all the residents of the province relied on him and would say: ‘No troops will come here. If troops came to the city, once he would emerge and show his face, they would flee immediately.’ One time the troops came, and he said to them: ‘My right hand hurts.’73Since he is not ready for battle, the enemies are no longer afraid of him. However, the Holy One blessed be He is not so, but rather, “Behold, the Lord’s hand is not too short to save…” (Isaiah 59:1).“The right hand of the Most High has changed.” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: If it is due to illnesses, there is hope, for one who is hurt will ultimately heal. But if it has changed, there is no hope.74In the case of the change to God’s right hand, as it were, there is hope, because the change is based on something akin to illness. The verse from Isaiah cited above is followed by the following: “But your iniquities have separated between you and your God” (Isaiah 59:2) (Matnot Kehuna). That is the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <who said: “for you have despised us, [you were exceedingly angry at us]” (lamentations 5:22). if it is despising, there is no hope. if it is anger, there is hope, as one who is angry will ultimately be appeased.>Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: ‘You wept a gratuitous weeping; ultimately, you will weep a weeping of substance.’ Where did Israel weep a gratuitous weeping? “Moses heard the people weeping according to its families” (Numbers 11:10). “The entire congregation raised and sounded their voice [and the people wept that night]” (Numbers 14:1). Where did Israel weep a weeping of substance? Rabbi Aivu and Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Aivu said: Once in Rama and once in Babylon. In Rama, as it is written: “So said the Lord: A voice is heard in Rama, wailing, bitter weeping, [Rachel weeping for her children]” (Jeremiah 31:15). In Babylon, as it is written: “By the rivers of Babylon, [there we sat and also wept]” (Psalms 137:1). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: One in the “province of Judah” (Ezra 5:8) and one in Babylon. In the province of Judah, “she weeps bitterly at night” (Lamentations 1:2). In Babylon, “by the rivers of Babylon.”Rabbi Aivu said: So said the Holy One blessed be He to Israel: ‘As a reward for that weeping, I will gather in your exiles.’ That is what is written: “So said the Lord, restrain your voice from weeping…there is hope for your future, the utterance of the Lord” (Jeremiah 31:16–17).“She weeps bitterly [bakho tivkeh],” she will weep [bakho] due to one calf; she will weep [tivkeh] due to two calves.75The midrash expounds the doubled Hebrew expression bakho tivkeh (in which the root bet-kaf-heh is used twice consecutively) to refer to two sins: The sin of the Golden Calf in the wilderness and Jeroboam’s two golden calves in the Land of Israel (see I Kings 12:26–30). Another matter, over Judah, and over Zion and Jerusalem.76Zion and Jerusalem count as one. Alternatively, they are separate and there is a third source of weeping expressed in the verse in Lamentations, which continues: “her tears are on her cheeks” (Lamentations 1:2). Another matter, she will weep [bakho] over the exile of the Ten Tribes; she will weep [tivkeh] over the exile of Judah and Benjamin. Another matter, she weeps and causes others to weep with her, she weeps and causes the Holy One blessed be He to weep with her, as it is written: “The Lord, God of hosts, called on that day for weeping and for lamentation” (Isaiah 22:12). She weeps and causes the ministering angels to weep with her, as it is written: “Behold, their angels cry out outside [ḥutza], [the messengers of peace weep bitterly]” (Isaiah 33:7). Rabbi Ze’eira said: Ḥitza is written,77The word ḥutza is written without a vav, such that it can be read ḥitza. it is unnatural [ḥitza] for him to slaughter him.78Rabbi Ze’eira interprets this verse as pertaining to God’s command to Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. The angels responded that this was a command that violated human nature. Rabbi Berekhya said: Just as it says: “He took him outside [haḥutza] [and said: Look now toward the heavens]” (Genesis 15:5).79Rabbi Berekhya cites this verse to demonstrate that ḥutza refers to the heavens. Thus, he interprets the verse in Genesis to mean that God took Abraham outside and directed him to look toward the heavens, and he interprets the verse in Isaiah to mean that the angels cry in the heavens.“She will weep [bakho],” she weeps and causes the heavens and the earth to weep with her. That is what is written: “The sun and the moon darkened” (Joel 2:10). “She will weep [bakho],” she weeps and causes the mountains and the hills to weep with her. That is what is written: “I saw the mountains [they are quaking, and all the hills have disintegrated]” (Jeremiah 4:24). “She will weep [bakho],” she weeps and causes the seventy nations to weep with her. Rabbi Pinḥas said: The seventy bulls that Israel would sacrifice on the festival of Sukkot correspond to the seventy nations, so that the world would not be vacant of them. “She will weep [bakho],” she weeps and casues the congregation of Israel to weep with her. That is what is written: “The entire congregation raised [vatisa]…[and the people wept that night]” (Numbers 14:1). Rabbi Ḥunya taught it in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Vatisa is written, they left a bad debt for the generations, just as it says: “When you lend [tasheh] to your neighbor” (Deuteronomy 24:10).
“At night,” why at night? Because sound travels only at night, that is why it is stated: “At night.” Rabbi Aivu said: Night draws lamentation with it.80When one cries at night, it has a greater impact on those who hear it, and they are moved to cry as well. There was an incident involving a certain woman who was in Rabban Gamliel’s neighborhood. She had a young son and he died. She would weep over him at night. Rabban Gamliel would hear her voice and recall the destruction of the Temple. He wept with her until his eyelashes fell out. When his disciples sensed it, they arose and evacuated her from his neighborhood.
“And her tears are on her cheeks [leḥya],” over her priests, just as it says: “He shall give to the priest the foreleg, the jaw [haleḥayayim], and the maw” (Deuteronomy 18:3). Alternatively, over her mighty, just as it says: “He found a fresh jawbone [leḥi] of a donkey [and he put forth his hand and took it and smote a thousand men with it]” (Judges 15:15). Alternatively, over her judges, just as you say: “They strike [the judge of Israel] on the cheek [haleḥi] with a rod” (Micah 4:14). Alternatively, over her lads; you find that when the enemies entered the Temple, they seized the lads and bound their hands behind them. They were weeping and the tears were flowing on their cheeks. They could not wipe them and they fell on their cheeks like the scar of a boil.81The tears seared their cheeks, similar to a wound, because they could not wipe them off.
“She has no comforter.” Rabbi Levi said: Any place that it is stated: “Has no [ein],” [ultimately] she will have. “Sarai was barren, she had no [ein] child” (Genesis 11:30), but [ultimately] she had, as it is stated: “The Lord remembered Sarah” (Genesis 21:1). Similarly, “Hannah had no [ein] children” (I Samuel 1:2), and [ultimately] she had, as it is stated: “For the Lord remembered Hannah” (I Samuel 2:21). Similarly, “She is Zion, she has no one [ein] seeking her” (Jeremiah 30:17), and [ultimately] she will have, as it is stated: “A redeemer will come to Zion” (Isaiah 59:20). So, too, it says: “She has no [ein] comforter,” and [ultimately] she will have, as it is stated: “I, it is I, who am your Comforter” (Isaiah 51:12).
“All her allies have betrayed her, have become [her enemies].” Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanan said: This is Mikhael and Gavriel.82Even these angels, who would defend Israel in the heavenly court, turned against it.
“Judah was exiled due to affliction and great enslavement. She settled among the nations, did not find rest; all her pursuers have overtaken her within the straits” (Lamentations 1:3).“Judah was exiled.” Are the nations of the world not exiled? Rather, even though they are exiled, their exile is not exile. The nations of the world who eat of their bread and drink of their wine, their exile is not exile.83They assimilate into their new surroundings, symbolized by the fact that they consume the bread and wine of the people in their new surroundings. Consequently, they do not experience exile as acutely as Jews experience it.  Israel, who do not eat of their bread and do not drink of their wine, their exile is exile. The nations of the world, who walk in their garments,84They adopt the mode of dress of their new surroundings. their exile is not exile, but Israel, who walk barefoot, their exile is exile. That is why it is stated: “Judah was exiled.” Here it is stated: “Judah was exiled [galeta],” and there it is stated: “Judah was exiled [vayegal] from upon its land” (Jeremiah 52:27),85The verse in Jeremiah uses the feminine form while the verse in Lamentations uses the masculine form. for once they were exiled, their power waned like a female. That is why it is stated: “Judah was exiled [galeta].”“Due to affliction [me’oni],” it is because they ate leavened bread on Passover, just as it says: “You shall not eat with it leavened bread; seven days you shall eat with it unleavened bread, the bread of affliction [oni]” (Deuteronomy 16:3). Alternatively, “due to affliction [me’oni],” because they took the collateral of a poor man [ani] into their homes, just as it says: “If he is a poor man, you shall not sleep with his collateral” (Deuteronomy 24:12). Alternatively, “due to affliction [me’oni],” because they withheld the wages of hired laborers, just as it says: “You shall not exploit a poor [ani] or indigent hired laborer” (Deuteronomy 24:14). Alternatively, “due to affliction [me’oni],” because they stole the gifts of the poor, just as you say: “You shall leave them for the poor [ani] and the stranger” (Leviticus 19:10, 23:22). Alternatively, “due to affliction [me’oni],” because they ate the tithe of the poor; Rabbi Beivai and Rabbi Huna [said] in the name of Rav: One who eats produce from which the tithe of the poor was not taken is liable to receive the death penalty. Alternatively, “due to affliction [me’oni],” because they engaged in idol worship, just as it says: “It is a sound of crying [anot] that I hear” (Exodus 32:18).86Moses said this when he heard the sound of the people worshipping the Golden Calf. Rabbi Aḥa said: It is the sound of lauding idol worship that I hear.87This is Rabbi Aḥa’s explanation of the phrase from Exodus 32:18. Rabbi Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Yosei: There is no generation that does not receive [punishment] due to the sin of the Calf.
“And great enslavement,” Rabbi Aḥa said: Because they would keep the Hebrew slave in servitude, just as it says: “At the end of seven years [each of] you shall free [his Hebrew brother]” (Jeremiah 34:14).“She settled among the nations, did not find rest,” Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: Had she found rest, she would not have returned. Similarly, “the dove did not find rest” (Genesis 8:9). Similarly, “among these nations you will not be calm, and there will be no rest for your foot” (Deuteronomy 28:65).“All her pursuers have overtaken her within the straits [hametzarim].” This is like what we learned, the statement of ben Nanas: By her demarcations and her borders [uvmetzranav].88Mishna, Bava Batra 7:3. The midrash cites this mishna to explain the Hebrew term employed in the verse in Lamentations. The word hametzarim, the straits, is understood to mean within her borders.Another matter, “All her pursuers have overtaken her within the straits,” in days of distress, between the seventeenth of Tamuz and the ninth of Av,89The walls of Jerusalem were breached on the seventeenth of Tamuz and the Temple was ultimately destroyed on the ninth of Av (Mishna, Taanit 4:6). during which Ketev Meriri90This is the name of a destructive demon. See Pesaḥim 111b. is prevalent, just as it says: “Nor the pestilence that stalks in darkness, nor the destruction [ketev] that lays waste at noon” (Psalms 91:6). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Levi, Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It passes through during the main time of sunlight,91The part of the day when the sun is strongest. from the beginning of the sixth hour until the end of the ninth.92These are halakhic hours. In this system, the daylight hours are divided into twelve equal parts. Rabbi Levi said: It passes through the main part of the day, from the end of the fourth hour until the beginning of the ninth. It does not pass through the sunlight or the shade, but rather through the shade adjacent to the sunlight.Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is completely full of eyes, scales, and hair. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: One eye is situated on its heart, and anyone who sees it falls and dies. There was an incident involving a certain pious man who saw it and he fell on his face and died. Some say it was Yehuda ben Rabbi [Yehuda Hanasi]. Shmuel saw it and did not fall. He said: It is [just] a house snake.Rabbi Abahu was sitting and studying in a synagogue in the area of Caesarea. He saw a certain person who was carrying a stick and going to strike another person. He saw a demon standing behind him carrying an iron rod. [Rabbi Abahu] stood and called out to him, saying to him: ‘Why do you seek to kill your counterpart?’ [The man] said to him: ‘Can a person kill another with this?’ He said to him: ‘There is a demon standing behind him that is carrying an iron rod. You strike him with this and it will strike him with that and he will die.’Rabbi Yoḥanan would instruct the teachers of Bible and the teachers of Mishna not to raise a strap to the children during those days.93The days between the seventeenth of Tamuz and the ninth of Av. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani would instruct the teachers of Bible and the teachers of Mishna to dismiss the children during those four hours.94He did not want the teachers to instruct the children at all during the four hours when Ketev Meriri is active in the world, lest the teachers strike the students, which could lead to danger due to the demon.
“The ways of Zion are in mourning, without Festival pilgrims; all her gates are desolate; her priests sigh; her maidens are forlorn, and she is embittered” (Lamentations 1:4).“The ways of Zion are in mourning.” Rav Huna said: Everything seeks to fulfill its role.95The reference here is to fulfilling its role by finding its mate (Matnot Kehuna). There was an incident involving a certain trained female dog that climbed to the top of a crag in order to mate with a male dog.96The trained dog would not generally climb in such a dangerous area, but it exposed itself to this danger in order to mate.  Rabbi Ami said: Even cedars seek to fulfill their roles. Know [that this is so], for there were no cedars in Babylon, but when Nebuchadnezzar ascended to here, he uprooted cedars from here and replanted them in Babylon. When he died they rejoiced over his downfall. That is what is written: “Cypresses, too, rejoice over you, the cedars of Lebanon, [since you have been laid down, the woodcutter does not come against us]” (Isaiah 14:8).97The cedars wanted to propagate in their native land rather than be cut down and transported elsewhere. Rabbi Avdimi of Haifa said: Even the roads seek to fulfill their role. That is what is written: “The ways of Zion are in mourning, without Festival pilgrims.” Without wooden huts and without dignitaries is not written here, but rather, “without Festival pilgrims.”“All her gates are desolate,” as there was no one entering or exiting through them. “Her priests sigh,” as there was no one to give them the priestly gifts, just as it says: “He shall give to the priest the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw” (Deuteronomy 18:3). Rabbi Yitzḥak ben Rabbi Simon said: “Her maidens are forlorn [nugot],” these are the Torah scholars, who were as beautiful as maidens and they became like wax [kadonag].98Just as wax melts away, their hearts melted in their sorrow (Matnot Kehuna). Rabbi Shmuel said that Rabbi Yitzḥak said: These are the dignitaries who were as beautiful as maidens and became like forlorn young women [nugot].Alternatively, “her maidens are forlorn,” as this one would come and violate her and that one would come and violate her until they greatly aggravated her wound. “And she is embittered,” she is embittered due to her nakedness.
“Her adversaries have become the head, her enemies are tranquil, for the Lord has tormented her for her abundant transgressions; her infants are led into captivity before the adversary (Lamentations 1:5).“Her adversaries have become the head.” Rabbi Hillel ben Rabbi Berekhya said: Anyone who comes to oppress Israel becomes a leader. What is the source? “Her adversaries have become the head.” You find that until Jerusalem was destroyed, there was no province that was at all significant.99No city inhabited by non-Jews in the Land of Israel was significant. When Jerusalem was destroyed, Caesarea became a metropolis and a fortified city.Another matter, “Her adversaries have become the head,” this is Nebuchadnezzar. “Her enemies are tranquil,” this is Nevuzaradan. Alternatively, “Her adversaries have become the head,” this is Vespasian. “Her enemies are tranquil,” this is Titus. For three-and-a-half years, Vespasian surrounded Jerusalem. There were four governors with him: The governor of Arabia, the governor of Africa, the governor of Alexandria, and the governor of Palestine. Regarding the governor of Arabia, there are two amora’im, one says that his name was Kilus and one said that his name was Pangar. There were four noblemen in Jerusalem: Ben Tzitzit, ben Guryon, ben Nakdimon, and ben Kalba Savua. Each and every one was capable of providing sustenance for the city for ten years. There was also ben Batiaḥ,100Ben Batiaḥ was the leader of the zealots. the son of the sister of Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai, who was appointed over the storehouses, and he burned all the storehouses.101The zealots wanted to confront the Romans militarily, and burned the storehouses so that the people would be so desperate that they would have to fight. Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai heard and said ‘woe [vai].’ They went and told ben Batiaḥ: ‘Your uncle said woe.’ He sent and had him brought and said to him: ‘Why did you say woe?’ He said to him: ‘I did not say woe. Rather, I said va.’102This is an exclamation of joy. He said to him: ‘You said va; why did you say va?’ He said: ‘Because you burned all the storehouses, and I said: As long as the storehouses are intact, they will not risk their lives to engage in battle.’ Between vai and va Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai escaped.103He would have been killed if he had been known to have criticized the zealots. They applied to him the verse: “The advantage of knowledge is that wisdom preserves the life of its possessors” (Ecclesiastes 7:12).Three days later, Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai went out to walk in the marketplace. He saw that they were boiling straw and drinking its broth. He said: ‘Are people who boil straw and drink its broth capable of standing against Vespasian’s troops?’ He said: ‘The priority is to get me out of here.’ He sent [a message] to ben Batiaḥ saying: ‘Get me out of here.’ [Ben Batiaḥ] said to him: ‘We have agreed among us that no person may emerge from here unless he is dead.’ He said: ‘Get me out in the guise of one who died.’ Rabbi Eliezer carried his [bier] from the head and Rabbi Yehoshua from the feet, and ben Batiaḥ walked before them. When they arrived they sought to stab him.104When they arrived at the gate of the city, the zealots standing guard sought to stab him to ensure that he was, in fact, dead. Ben Batiaḥ said to them: ‘Is that what you want, that they will say that their rabbi died and they stabbed him?’ When he said that to them, they let him go. When they went out of the gate of the wall, they carried him and placed him in a certain tomb and they returned to the city. Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai went to walk among Vespasian’s troops. He said to them: ‘Where is the king?’ They went and said to Vespasian: ‘A certain Jew wishes to inquire after your wellbeing.’ He said to them: ‘Let him come.’ When he came he said: ‘Long live my lord, the emperor.’ He said to him: ‘You greeted me with the greeting of a king, but I do not reign [as king], and if the king will hear of it, he will kill me.’105Literally, “he will kill that man.” Vespasian was referring to himself, as it was considered an act of rebellion to allow oneself to be treated as a king. [Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai] said to him: ‘If you are not [yet] the king, ultimately you will reign, as this Temple will be destroyed only by a king, as it is stated: “The Lebanon will fall by a mighty one”’ (Isaiah 10:34). They took him and placed him behind seven partitions.106They placed him in detention in a place where there was no daylight. They would ask him: ‘What hour of the night is it?’ He would tell them. ‘What hour of the day is it?’ He would tell them. How did Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai know? It was from his studies.107Based on the amount of material that he covered, he was able to calculate the time that elapsed (Etz Yosef).Three days later, Vespasian went to bathe in the Gafna spring. After he bathed and put on one of his shoes, tidings reached him informing him that Nero had died and that the citizens of Rome had crowned him king. He sought to put on his other shoe, but it did not fit. He sent and had Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai brought and he said to him: ‘Are you not able to tell me? All these days I would wear two shoes and they would fit me, now one fits and one does not fit.’ He said to him: ‘You received good tidings, as it is written: “Good tidings fatten the bone”’ (Proverbs 15:30). He said to him: ‘What shall I do so it will fit?’ He said to him: ‘Is there a person whom you hate or who wronged you? Let him pass before you and your flesh will recede, as it is written: “A depressed spirit dries bones”’ (Proverbs 17:22).They began telling parables before him: ‘What should one do to a barrel in which a snake has nested?’108Their point was to trap him into admitting that he should have fought against the zealots of Jerusalem. He said to them: ‘One brings a snake charmer, charms the snake, and leaves the barrel intact.’ Pangar said: ‘One kills the snake and breaks the barrel.’ ‘What should one do to a cabinet in which a snake has nested?’ He said to them: ‘One brings a snake charmer, charms the snake, and leaves the cabinet intact.’ Pangar said: ‘One kills the snake and burns the cabinet.’ Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai said to Pangar: ‘All neighbors who perform evil perform it in their own neighborhood. Not only do you fail to plea in our favor, you speak to our detriment.’109Pangar was the governor of Arabia, which is near the Land of Israel. By inciting Vespasian to deal harshly with the Jews, Pangar made it more likely that Vespasian would also deal harshly with Arabia. He said to him: ‘I want only what is best for you. As long as that Temple is intact, the kingdoms will confront you; if that Temple is destroyed, the kingdoms will not confront you.’ Rabban Yoḥanan said to him: ‘The heart knows whether it is constructive [laakal]110Literally, a woven basket. A play on words; literally, for a basket. or crooked [laakalkalot].’111This phrase literally means “whether it is for a woven basket [laakal] or crooked [laakalkalot].” This was a common expression based on the play of words, and simply means the heart knows its real intent.Vespasian said to Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai: ‘Make a request and I will grant it.’ He said to him: ‘I request that you leave this city and go on your way.’ He said to him: ‘Did the citizens of Rome crown me so I would leave this city? Make a [different] request and I will grant it.’ He said to him: ‘I request that you leave the gate of the western gate, which points toward Lod, so that anyone who emerges for four hours will be saved.’ After [Vespasian] conquered it, he said to him: ‘If you have someone who is beloved to you or someone with whom you are close, send and bring him before the soldiers enter.’ He sent to Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua to take out Rabbi Tzadok. They went and found him at the city gate. When he came, Rabban Yoḥanan stood before him. Vespasian said to him: ‘You stand before this repulsive old man?’ He said to him: ‘By your life, if there was another like him, and you had double the [number of your] soldiers, you would not be able to conquer [the city.’ He said to him: ‘What is his strength?’ He said to him: ‘He eats one gamzuz112A fruit similar to a fig (Arukh). and from it studies one hundred chapters.’ He said to him: ‘Why is he so emaciated?’ He said to him: ‘It is due to the effects of fasts and abstinences.’ [Vespasian] sent and brought physicians and they would feed him a little at a time and would give him to drink a little at a time, until his body was restored [to good health]. Elazar, his son,113The son of Rabbi Tzadok. said to him: ‘Father, give them their reward in this world, so that they will have no merit with you in the World to Come.’ He gave them [a method for] mathematical calculations with fingers114This was a method of using the fingers to aid in easy computations of multiplication tables from six to nine (Yefei Anaf). and scales.115He introduced to them a new type of scale for weighing.After he conquered it, he distributed the four sides to the four governors. The western gate was in the portion of Pangar. It was decreed from Heaven that it would never be destroyed. Why? Because the Divine Presence is in the west. They destroyed theirs, he did not destroy his. [Vespasian] sent and had him brought and said to him: ‘Why did you not destroy yours?’ He said to him: ‘By your life, I did so for the glory of the kingdom. Had I destroyed it, people would not know what you destroyed. When the people will see [the remaining wall], they will say: Look at the power of Vespasian, what he destroyed.’ He said to him: ‘By your life, you have spoken well; however, because you violated my command, that man116The reference is to Pangar himself. will ascend to the roof and cast himself from it. If he lives, he lives; if he dies, he dies.’ He ascended, cast himself, and died. The curse of Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai came upon him.117Rabban Yoḥanan had implied that if Pangar’s intentions were malicious toward the Jews, he should be cursed.
“For the Lord has tormented her for her abundant transgressions.” Is it, perhaps, for nothing? The verse states: “For her abundant transgressions.” “Her infants are led into captivity before the adversary,” Rabbi Yehuda said: Come and see how dear children are <before the holy one blessed be he>. The Sanhedrin was exiled, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. The priestly watches were exiled, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. When the children were exiled, the Divine Presence was exiled with them. That is what is written: “Her infants are led into captivity before the adversary.” Immediately,118This is meant to be read together with the next section.
“Gone from the daughter of Zion is all her splendor. Her princes are like deer that have not found pasture; they went powerless before the pursuer” (Lamentations 1:6)“Gone from the daughter [mibat] of Zion.” Min bat is written. Rabbi Aḥa said: We have one fine portion; that is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is written in His regard: “The Lord is my lot [menat ḥelki] and my portion” (Psalms 16:5). “All its splendor,” this is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “You are clothed in glory and splendor” (Psalms 104:1).119Thus, when the children were exiled (Lamentations 1:5), God was exiled too, as it were, as implied in Lamentations 1:6. Alternatively, “all its splendor,” this is the Sanhedrin, as it is written: “Might and splendor are her garments” (Proverbs 31:25).120This is stated regarding the Torah. Since it is the Sanhedrin who interpret the Torah and translates it into practical terms, they are the ones who clothe Torah in glory and splendor. The term splendor in Lamentations can therefore also be interpreted as referring to the Sanhedrin.  Alternatively, “all its splendor [hadarah],” these are Torah scholars, as it is written: “You shall rise before the aged and honor [vehadarta] the presence of a sage” (Leviticus 19:32). Alternatively, “all its splendor,” these are the priestly watches, as it is written: “Praising with the splendor of holiness” (II Chronicles 20:21). Alternatively, “all its splendor,” these are the children. Rabbi Yehuda said: Come and see how dear children are before the Holy One blessed be He. The Sanhedrin was exiled, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. The priestly watches were exiled, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. When the children were exiled, the Divine Presence was exiled with them. That is what is written: “Her infants are led into captivity before the adversary.” Immediately, “gone from the daughter of Zion is all her splendor.”“Her princes are like deer [that have not found pasture].”121Pasture is typically associated with sheep, not deer. Rabbi Yehuda said: When they are soft they are likened to sheep, as it is stated: “The sheep will graze as in their pasture” (Isaiah 5:17). When they are rigid they are likened to deer, as it is stated: “Her princes are like deer.”Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Shimon bar Abba and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua [said]: Just as these deer turn their faces away from one another during a heat wave,122They race directly to a water source with no consideration for any other deer. so too the prominent among Israel would see a matter of transgression and would turn their faces away from it. The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘A time will come when I will do so to you.’“They went powerless before the pursuer.” Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: When Israel performs the will of the Omnipresent, they add strength to the power on high, just as it says: “With God we will triumph” (Psalms 60:14). When Israel does not perform the will of the Omnipresent, they, as it were, exhaust the great power on high, as it is written: “You abandoned the Rock that begot you” (Deuteronomy 32:18). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon [said] in the name of Rabbi Levi ben Rabbi Tarfon: When Israel performs the will of the Holy One blessed be He, they add strength to the power on high, just as it says: “Now, please, let the power of the Lord be great” (Numbers 14:17). When Israel does not perform the will of the Holy One blessed be He, they, as it were, exhaust the great power on high, and they, too, go “powerless before the pursuer.”Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Aḥa, and Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, and the Rabbis in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: A person would say to his counterpart in Jerusalem: ‘Read one Bible column to me,’ and he would say to him: ‘I do not have the strength.’ ‘Teach me one chapter of Mishna,” and he would say to him: ‘I do not have the strength.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘A time will come and I will do so to you.’“They went powerless before the pursuer [rodef].” Rabbi Aḥa said: Just as Israel was exiled only by a full-fledged pursuer, so, they will be redeemed only with a full-fledged redeemer, as it is written: “A redeemer [goel] will come to Zion” (Isaiah 59:20), it is written full.123The Hebrew word is  written with a vav, just as the word rodef in the verse in Lamentations is written with a vav, despite the fact that both could have been written without the vav.
“Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and her wretchedness, all her delights that she had from the days of old; with the fall of her people into the hand of the adversary, with no one helping her, the adversaries saw her, mocked her over her deficiencies” (Lamentations 1:7).“Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and her wretchedness.” In the days of her affliction, she remembered the rebellions that she rebelled against the Holy One blessed be He. “All her delights [maḥamudeha],” these are words of Torah, just as it says: “They are more desirable [haneḥemadim] than gold, than much fine gold” (Psalms 19:11).“With the fall of her people into the hand of the adversary,” the Rabbis there124In Babylon. say: When a bull falls its slaughterers are many. The Rabbis here125In Israel. say: When a bull falls, sharpen the knives.126These are expressions that were common in Babylon or the Land of Israel. The point is that when one is weak and vulnerable, it is much more common for people to rush to take advantage of that weakness than to provide protection.“With no one helping her.” The Rabbis there say: When you insult a bride, she remembers the seven days of rejoicing. The Rabbis here say: When a son goes barefoot, he remembers the tranquility of his father’s home.127Similarly, when the residents of Jerusalem were suffering, they thought back to the comforts of earlier times.“The adversaries saw her, mocked her over he deficiencies [mishbateha],” over her Shabbatot, just as it says: “Remember the Shabbat day to sanctify it” (Exodus 20:8).128The midrash interprets the verse as saying that the gentiles mocked the Jews for the fact that they observed Shabbat, and attempted to coerce them to violate Shabbat (Etz Yosef). Alternatively, “over her deficiencies [mishbateha],” over her Sabbatical years [shemitoteha], just as it says: “In the seventh year there shall be a sabbath of complete rest [for the land]” (Leviticus 25:4). Alternatively, “over her deficiencies [mishbateha],” this is Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai, who ceased [sheshavat] to be in her.129The midrash interprets the phrase “mocked [saḥaku] it over its deficiencies [mishbateha]” to mean that they rejoiced [saḥaku] over he who ceased [sheshavat] to be in it. When they saw that Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakai left the city, they knew that it would be conquered (Etz Yosef).
“Jerusalem has committed a sin, therefore she has become a pariah. All who honored her demean her because they have seen her nakedness. She, too, sighed and turned back” (Lamentations 1:8).“Jerusalem has committed a sin.” Do the nations of the world not sin? Rather, even though they sin, it is nothing.130They are not held to account as severely as Israel. This is due to Israel’s elevated status and its covenant with God. However, Israel sinned and was punished. “Therefore she has become a pariah [lenida],” she has become itinerant.131Nad, means wandering, itinerant. “All who honored her demean her because they have seen her nakedness. She, too, sighed and turned back,” back from the priesthood, back from kingship.
“Her impurity is on her hems, she had not considered her end; she has declined extraordinarily, there is no one to comfort her. See, Lord, my affliction, for the enemy has expanded” (Lamentations 1:9).“Her impurity is on her hems.” Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: All the priests who served during the reign of Zedekiah were uncircumcised.132This is the impurity to which the verse alludes. That is what is written: “As you brought strangers uncircumcised of heart and uncircumcised of flesh” (Ezekiel 44:7).Another matter, “Her impurity is on her hems [beshuleha],” in her lower reaches [shipuleha], just as it says: “At the hems of the robe” (Exodus 28:34). Alternatively, “her impurity is on her hems,” like what we learned: There was a place below Jerusalem, Tofet was its name. Rabbi Yehuda says: It is so named due to the inferno that was in it. Rabbi Yosei said: The Valley of ben Hinom. There was a hollow idol there that was placed behind seven partitions. There was a bronze tray in its hand and there was a stove placed upon it. For anyone who would sacrifice fine flour, they would open one [partition] for him; pigeons and turtledoves, they would open two for him; a sheep, they would open three for him; a ram, they would open four for him; a calf, they would open five for him; a bull, they would open six for him; and for anyone who would sacrifice his son, they would open seven for him. They would place him into the bronze tray and ignite the stove beneath him. They would laud before him and say to him: ‘May it be pleasant for you and sweet for you.’ Why to that extent?133Why did they loudly sing the praises of the idol? So they would not hear the moaning of their sons and change their minds.The priest came to a man and said to him: ‘[I have come] because such and such idol said to me: With all the sons that you have, do you not wish to sacrifice one of them?’ [The man] said to him: ‘Are there in my control? One is working in gold, one in silver, one in flocks, and one in cattle.’ He [then] said to him: ‘Wait, did you see that I have a small son, in school? When he comes I will give him to you.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Wicked one, of all the sons that you have, did you need to cast to the idol the one who is devoted to My name?’134The young son was studying Torah in school.Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Simon [said] in the name of Rabbi Levi ben Perata: [This is analogous] to a noblewoman whose lover said to her: ‘Prepare hot water for me.’ She took the king’s wreath135A wreath given by the king as a sign of honor. She used this to fuel the fire to heat the water. and prepared hot water for him. The king said to her: ‘Of all the wood that you have in this house, did you need to heat water for your lover only in my tub?’ So too, the Holy One blessed be He said to that wicked one: ‘Of all the sons that you have, did you need to cast to the idol the one who is devoted to My name?’ That is what is written: “You took your sons…[and these you slaughtered for them to devour]” (Ezekiel 16:20). “She has declined extraordinarily,” she descended to ordeals.
When Rabbi Yosei of Milḥaya died, Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish went up to perform an act of kindness136They went to participate in the funeral. and Rabbi Yitzḥak Pesaka went up with them. There was a certain elder there who sought to ascend and begin eulogizing him, but they did not allow him to do so. Rabbi Yitzḥak Pesaka said to him: ‘Before these lions of Torah you open your mouth?’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said to them: ‘Leave him, as he is an elder. Let him ascend and be honored in his place.’137Since he is an elder and a local, let him deliver the first eulogy. He ascended, began, and said: ‘We find that the departure of the righteous is more difficult before the Holy One blessed be He than the ninety-eight rebukes in Mishne Torah138This is a reference to the book of Deuteronomy. The reference is to the warnings of punishment in Deuteronomy 28:15–68. and the destruction of the Temple. In the rebukes it is written: “The Lord will render your blows extraordinary [vehifla]” (Deuteronomy 28:59).139The Lord will strike you with extraordinary blows. Regarding the destruction of the Temple it is written: “She has declined extraordinarily [pela’im].” However, regarding the departure of the righteous it is written: “Therefore, behold, I will continue to bewilder [lehafli] this people, bewilderment [hafleh] upon bewilderment [vafeleh]” (Isaiah 29:14). Why to that extent? “The wisdom of her wise will be lost and the understanding of her men of understanding will be concealed” (Isaiah 29:14).’ Rabbi Yitzḥak Pesaka said: ‘May the mouth of this man be blessed.’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said to him: ‘Had we not allowed him, from where would we have heard this pearl?’The Divine Spirit was shouting and saying: “See, Lord, my affliction, for the enemy has expanded.”140The midrash has returned to explicating the verse in Lamentations 1:8. The point is that the first part of the verse is a description of what has happened, whereas the phrase “see, Lord…” is the prophet, influenced by the Divine Spirit, calling out to God. “Evildoers dig pits for me that do not accord with Your Torah” (Psalms 119:85). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said two [examples]: It is written: “Do not take the mother with the young” (Deuteronomy 22:6), and here: “A mother was torn apart with her children” (Hosea 10:14);141The Torah prohibits trapping the mother bird while she is with her young, but the enemies attacked mothers in the presence of their children. that is, “that do not accord with Your Torah.”Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said another: It is written: “To eradicate an infant from the street” (Jeremiah 9:20), but not from the synagogues; “young men from the squares” (Jeremiah 9:20), but not from the study halls. But here, “the wrath of the Lord arose against them…[He struck down the young warriors among them]” (Psalms 78:31);142The “young warriors” refers to those involved in the study of Torah. At times the debate of matters of halakha in the course of study is compared to war (see, e.g., Megilla 15b). Alternatively, some suggest that the correct version of the text is as cited in Yalkut Shimoni, Tehillim 877, which provides a different prooftext: “Who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary” (II Chronicles 36:17) (Rabbi David Luria; Etz Yosef). that is, “that do not accord with Your Torah.”Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said two [examples]: It is written: “An ox or a sheep, it and its offspring you shall not slaughter on one day” (Leviticus 22:28), but here, child and mother were killed on one day, as it is stated: “A mother was torn apart with her children” (Hosea 10:14); that is, “that do not accord with Your Torah.”Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said another: It is written: “Who will hunt game of a beast…he shall [pour out its blood and] cover it with dirt” (Leviticus 17:13). But here, “They spilled their blood like water around Jerusalem, and there was no one to bury them” (Psalms 79:3); that is, “that do not accord with Your Torah.”Rabbi Berekhya said: The congregation of Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, You afforded burial to donkeys, but to Your children You did not afford burial.’ You afforded burial to donkeys, these are the Egyptians. That is what is written: “Whose flesh is the flesh of donkeys” (Ezekiel 23:20). And Rabbi Berekhya said: Because the sea would cast them to the dry land and the dry land cast them to the sea. The sea said to the dry land: ‘Accept your people,’ and the dry land said to the sea: ‘Accept your people.’ The dry land said: ‘If when I accepted only Abel’s blood, it is stated in my regard: “Cursed is the land” (Genesis 3:17), how can I accept the blood of this entire multitude?’ [This continued] until the Holy One blessed be He took an oath to it that He would not place it on trial. That is what is written: “You extended Your right hand; the earth swallowed them” (Exodus 15:12). The right hand is nothing other than an oath, as it is stated: “The Lord took an oath by His right hand” (Isaiah 62:8). But to your people, you did not afford burial, that is, “that do not accord with Your Torah.”
“The adversary extended his hand over all her delights; for she saw the nations entering her Sanctuary, whom You had commanded that they should not enter Your assembly” (Lamentations 1:10).“The adversary extended his hand.” You find that when the enemies entered the Temple, Amonites and Moavites entered with them. Everyone was running to plunder silver and gold, and the Amonites and Moavites were running to plunder the Torah, in order to remove “An Amonite and Moavite shall not enter the assembly of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:4). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon [said] in the name of Rabbi Levi ben Perata: This is analogous to a conflagration that was ignited in a king’s palace. Everyone was running to plunder the silver and the gold while a slave ran to plunder his writ of servitude. So too, when the enemies entered the Temple, Amonites and Moavites entered with them. Everyone was running to plunder silver and gold, and the Amonites and Moavites were running to plunder the Torah, in order to remove “An Amonite and Moavite shall not enter the assembly of the Lord.”Abraham bestowed four good things upon Lot. That is what is written: “Abram went, as the Lord had spoken to him, and Lot went with him” (Genesis 12:4). And it says: “Lot, too, who was going with Abram [had sheep, cattle and tents]” (Genesis 13:5). And it says: “He returned all the property, [and also his brother Lot and his property he returned]” (Genesis 14:16). And it says: “It was when God destroyed the cities of the plain [God remembered Abraham, and He sent Lot from the midst of the upheaval]” (Genesis 19:29). Correspondingly, they should have repaid them with goodness;143Lot’s descendants, the nations of Amon and Moav, should have been kind to Abraham’s descendants. however, they performed acts of wickedness. That is what is written: “He sent messengers to Bilam…now, please go and curse for me…. The elders of Moav and the elders of Midian went…” (Numbers 22:5–7). “He gathered to him the children of Amon and Amalek, [and he went and smote Israel]” (Judges 3:13).144The verse is stated regarding Eglon, king of Moav. “It was thereafter, the children of Moav, and the children of Amon, and with them some Amonites, came against Yehoshafat” (II Chronicles 20:1). And this: “The adversary extended his hand...”Correspondingly, their sins are written in four places. “An Amonite and Moavite [shall not enter the assembly of the Lord]…because they did not greet you with bread and with water…” (Deuteronomy 23:4–5). “My people, remember now what Balak king of Moav devised…” (Micah 6:5). “Because they did not greet the children of Israel with bread and with water, and hired Bilam against them, to curse them” (Nehemiah 13:2). “He sent and summoned Bilam son of Beor to curse you” (Joshua 24:9).Correspondingly, four prophets stood and sealed their sentence, and they were: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Zephaniah. Isaiah said: “A prophecy of Moav: For on the night that Ar of Moav is plundered, it is ruined; for on the night that Kir of Moav is plundered, it is ruined” (Isaiah 15:1). Jeremiah said: “Behold, days are coming, the utterance of the Lord, and I will sound to Raba of the children of Amon an alarm of war, and it will become a mound of desolation, and its environs will be burned in fire, and Israel will inherit its inheritors, said the Lord” (Jeremiah 49:2). Ezekiel said: “To the children of the east, against the children of Amon, and I will give it as a heritage, so that the children of Amon will not be remembered among the nations. I will administer punishments to Moav, and they will know that I am the Lord” (Ezekiel 25:10–11). Zephaniah said: “Therefore, as I live, the utterance of the Lord of hosts, God of Israel, Moav will be like Sodom and the children of Amon like Gomorrah, a rustling thornbush, a salt mine, a desolate wasteland forever. The remnant of My people will plunder them and the rest of My nation will inherit them” (Zephaniah 2:9).
“All its people are sighing, seeking bread; they have given their delights for food to restore life. See, Lord, and look, for I have become abject” (Lamentations 1:11).“All its people are sighing.” It is written: “In the fourth month, on the ninth of the month, the famine intensified in the city [and there was no bread for the people of the land]” (Jeremiah 52:6). “For the people of the land” there was no bread, but for the residents of Judah there was bread.145This is a reference to the aristocracy, who still had stores of bread. That was in the first destruction. However, in the second destruction: “All its people are sighing, seeking bread…” Initially, they would lower them a basket of gold and they would give them a basket of wheat.146The wealthy residents of Jerusalem would lower baskets of gold over the wall and enemy soldiers would give them baskets of wheat in exchange. Subsequently, they would lower them a basket of gold and they would give them a basket of barley. Subsequently, they would lower them a basket and they would give them a basket of straw. What would they do? They would boil it and drink its broth. Subsequently, they would lower them a basket of gold, and they would give them nothing. Rabbi Yehuda ben Sigena said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: If, regarding one who could give but did not take, it says: “You shall give him” (Deuteronomy 15:10), one who takes and does not give, all the more so.147The verse cited requires one to give charity to the needy, and follows a verse that states that if one fails to do so, it is considered a sin (Deuteronomy 15:9). How much more so, one who takes from the needy and does not even give anything in return (Rabbi David Luria).“To restore life,” with how much is life restored? Rabbi says: A date-bulk. Rabbi Ḥananya said: A dried fig-bulk.“See, Lord, and look.” Rabbi Pinḥas said: There was an incident involving two women, prostitutes, who were fighting with one another. One said to her counterpart while they were fighting with one another: ‘Won’t you go away from here, as your face appears like that of a Jewess.’ Some time later they reconciled. She said to her: ‘I pardon and forgive you for everything, but for the fact that you said to me: Your face appears like that of a Jewess, I will not pardon and I will not forgive you.’ That is why it is stated: “For I have become abject.”
“May it not befall you, all wayfarers. Look and see: Is there any pain like my pain, which has been done to me, with which the Lord has tormented me on the day of His enflamed wrath?” (Lamentations 1:12).“May it not befall you,” the congregation of Israel says to the nations of the world: Let what befell us not befall you. Let what happened to me not happen to you; “all wayfarers [overei derekh],” all violators of [overei] the way [derekh] of Torah. “Look and see.” We learned there: The sentence of the generation of the Flood lasted twelve months, the sentence of the Egyptians lasted twelve months, the sentence of Job lasted twelve months, the sentence of Gog and Magog lasts twelve months, the sentence of the wicked in Gehenna lasts twelve months.148Mishna Eduyot 2:10. Nebuchadnezzar was three and a half years. Sennacherib was over three and a half years. Vespasian was three and a half years.149The respective sieges of Nebuchadnezzar, leading to the destruction of the first Temple, and Vespasian, leading to the destruction of the second Temple, lasted three and a half years each. This demonstrates how the suffering of the Jews during that time was unparalleled.“Look and see: Is there any pain like my pain, which has been done [olal] to me.” He was exacting with me and plucked my gleanings [olalti], just as it says: “When you harvest your vineyard [you shall not glean [teolel] behind you]” (Deuteronomy 24:21).150It is forbidden to pluck the grapes in clusters that are not fully formed, which must be left for the poor. However, the enemies of Jerusalem killed everyone and destroyed everything. “With which the Lord has tormented me on the day of His enflamed wrath.” Rabbi Aḥa said: The enflamed wrath of the Holy One blessed be He was one day. Had Israel repented, they would have cooled it.
“From on high He sent fire into my bones, and He crushed them; He spread a net for my feet, He turned me back. He rendered me desolate, suffering all day” (Lamentations 1:13).“From on high He sent fire into my bones.” Rabbi Ami asked Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani, he said to him: ‘Because I heard about you, that you are a master of aggada, what is [the meaning of] that which is written: “For Your righteousness [vetzikatekha], God, reaches on high”?’ (Psalms 71:19). He said to him: ‘Just as those below are required to perform charity [tzedaka] with one another, so those on high are required to perform charity with one another.’Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Any place where it is stated: “He said, he said,”151Wherever the term “he said” appears twice in the introduction to a single statement. it is stated only to be expounded. That is what is written: “He said to the man clothed in linen, and He said: Come to between the galgal [beneath the cherub, and fill your hands with smoldering coals from between the cherubs, and cast them upon the city]” (Ezekiel 10:2). What is “He said,” “He said,” twice? It is that the Holy One blessed be He spoke to the angel, and the angel [then] said to the cherub: ‘Even though the Holy One blessed be He decreed upon me to take the coals, I am not allowed to enter behind your partition. Rather, perform an act of kindness and give me two of your coals so I will not be burned.’ That is what is written: “He carried it and placed it into the cupped hands of the one clothed in linen” (Ezekiel 10:7). What is “he carried it and he placed it”? Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He cooled them and placed them in his hand.Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin [said] in the name of Rabbi Levi: For six years the coals were dimly smoldering in Gabriel’s hand, and he believed that Israel would repent. When they did not repent, he sought to cast them upon them in rage. The Holy One blessed be He summoned him and said to him: ‘Gabriel, Gabriel! Slowly, slowly, for there are among them those who perform charity with one another.’ That is what is written: “On the cherubs the form of a man’s hand was seen beneath their wings” (Ezekiel 10:8).152The hand represents the Holy One blessed be He preventing Gabriel from casting the coals on them.Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Levi: What holds up the supernal and the earthly? It is the charity that Israel performs with the hand. That is what is written: “For Your righteousness, God, reaches on high” (Psalms 71:19).153The verse is interpreted to mean that the merit of the charity that God commanded Israel to perform “reaches on high,” in that it supports even the heavens.Similarly, “The man of God approached and said to the king of Israel, and said: So said the Lord: [Because Aram said: The Lord is a God of mountains and not a God of lowlands, I will deliver all this great multitude into your hand, and you will know that I am the Lord]” (I Kings 20:28). What is “and said” twice? It is that in the first statement he said to him: ‘If ben Hadad comes under your control, have no pity on him.’ In the second statement, he said to him: ‘How many traps have I laid, how many signals have I sent, how many conquests did I perform before I subdued him before you, and now you have freed him in peace?’ Therefore, “your life shall be in place of his life, and your people instead of his people” (I Kings 20:42).Similarly, “King Aḥashverosh said and he said to Queen Esther” (Esther 7:5). What is “he said,” “he said,” twice? Rav said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: Before he sensed that she was Jewish, he would speak to her directly. Once he sensed that she was Jewish, King Aḥashverosh spoke to the translator and the translator spoke to Queen Esther.Similarly, “The Lord said to Moses: Speak to the priests, sons of Aaron, and say to them” (Leviticus 21:1). Why do I need these two sayings? It is that in the first saying, He said to him: “He shall not become impure from a corpse among his people” (Leviticus 21:1). In the second, He said to him: ‘If you come upon a corpse that it is a mitzva to bury, impurify yourself for it.’154Although a priest is forbidden from becoming impure from a corpse, if there is a corpse that has no one to bury it, it is a mitzva for anyone, even a priest, to see to the burial. Since in this world you impurify yourself for a corpse that it is a mitzva to bury, in the future you will not become impure from any corpse, for there will be no death in the future, as it is stated: “He will eliminate death forever” (Isaiah 25:8).Alternatively, “for Your righteousness, God, reaches on high, [for the great deeds You have done]” these are the two luminaries.155This refers to the sun and the moon. “God, who is comparable to You” (Psalms 71:19), in that You suppress the attribute of justice. At that moment, the accuser leapt before the Throne of Glory and said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, will this wicked one arrogantly say: I destroyed the house of the Lord and burned His Temple? If it is so,156If the Temple must be destroyed. let fire descend from on high and burn it.’ Immediately, what is written: “From on high He sent fire into my bones.” Rabbi Yehoshua said: That is why the prophet rebukes Babylon and says to it: “Take a millstone and grind flour” (Isaiah 47:2). Everyone grinds wheat, yet it says “grind flour”? Rather, Jerusalem said to the daughter of Babylon: Had war not been waged against me from on high, could you have waged war against me? Had fire not been sent against me from on high, could you have overcome me? Rather, you killed a dead lion. You ground already ground flour. You set fire to a burned city. That is why it says: “From on high He sent fire into my bones and He crushed them [vayirdena].” What is “and He crushed them [vayirdena]”? Moved them, just as you say: “He scooped [vayirdehu] it into his hands” (Judges 14:9).157The midrash is interpreting the word vayirdena to mean “he moved them” rather than “He crushed them.” Thus, the verse is interpreted to mean that God sent fire from on high against the Temple, and the enemy merely moved the burned bones.Alternatively, vayirdena [means] ruled, just as it says: “He will rule [veyerd] from sea to sea” (Psalms 72:8). Alternatively, vayirdena [means] subjugated, just as it says: “For he subjugated [rodeh] the entire region beyond the River” (I Kings 5:4). Alternatively, vayirdena [means] plowing [radya], as it is taught: Rufus plowed the Sanctuary. Rabbi Beiva of Rangaya said: Vayirdena, he saw [vayar] the attribute of justice [din] harming it.“He spread a net for my feet.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: If you see benches filled with Babylonians situated in the Land of Israel, anticipate the footsteps of the Messiah. What is the source? “He spread [paras] a net for my feet.”158This is expounded as a reference to Persia [paras]. When the Persians, whose empire included Babylon, spread their net in the Land of Israel, it will be a harbinger of the Messiah. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: If you see a Persian horse tied in the Land of Israel, anticipate the footsteps of the Messiah. What is the source? “This will be peace: When Assyria [will come into our land and when it will tread in our palaces, we will raise against it seven shepherds, and eight princes of men]” (Micah 5:4). “He turned me back,” away from the priesthood, away from the kingdom. “He rendered me desolate,” set for destruction; “suffering all day,” [sent] to the gallows.
“The yoke of my transgressions is preserved in His hand, becoming entangled, coming upon my neck, sapping my strength. The Lord delivered me into the hands of those against whom I cannot stand” (Lamentations 1:14).“The yoke of my transgressions is preserved [niskad] in His hand,” I was calm [seduka] regarding my iniquities. I believed that He would pardon me for all my iniquities when I heard that my promissory note was ripped on high.159When God said to Moses that He pardoned the people for the sin of the Golden Calf, they thought they were entirely pardoned, but in fact God had merely agreed not to annihilate them completely, but rather to punish them incrementally.Another matter, niskad is written with a shin.160The word niskad is written with a sin rather than a samech. A sin can also be read as a shin when it is not vocalized, as it is the same letter. Thus, the word can be read nishkad. The Holy One blessed be He strove [shakad] to find how to bring the calamity upon me. He said: If I exile them during the season of Tevet,161Winter. they will suffer from cold and die. Rather, I will exile them during the season of Tamuz,162Summer. as even if they sleep in the streets and squares, not one of them will be harmed.Another matter, niskad, He strove [shakad] to find how to bring the calamity upon me. He said: If I exile them during the season of Tevet, there are no grapes on the vine and no figs on the fig tree. Rather, I will exile them during the season of Tamuz, when there are grapes on the vine, figs on the fig tree, and even the leaves do not wither.Another matter, niskad, He strove [shakad] to find how to bring evil upon me. He said: If I exile them through the wilderness, they will die of starvation. Rather, I will exile them through Armenis, where there are cities and districts, and food and drink are found there.Another matter, niskad, I was calm [sekuda] regarding my iniquities. I believed that He would pardon me for all my iniquities. However, “becoming entangled [yistargu],” He brought alternating [serigot] rulers upon me]. He brought them upon me in pairs: Babylon and the Chaldeans, Media and Persia, Greece and Macedonia, Edom and Ishmael. He brought them upon me, alternating: Babylon was harsh, Media was moderate; Greece was harsh, Edom was moderate; the Chaldeans were harsh, Persia was moderate; Macedonia was harsh, and Ishmael was moderate. Likewise, “some of the kingdom will be strong, and some of it will be brittle” (Daniel 2:42). Despite all these I did not deny my God; rather, “coming [alu] upon my neck.”163This is expounded as though it were written ulo, His yoke, such that the verse would read: “His yoke is upon my neck.” And [Israel] declares the unity of His name twice daily and says: “Hear Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is one” (Deuteronomy 6:4).
“Sapping my strength,” Rabbi Tanḥum ben Rabbi Yirmeya said: There are four matters that exhaust a person’s strength, and they are: Fasting, the road, iniquity, and the kingdom of Babylon. Fasting, as it is written: “My knees are weak from fasting” (Psalms 109:24). The road, as it is written: “Along the way He has weakened my strength” (Psalms 102:24). Iniquity, as it is written: “In my iniquity, my strength has failed” (Psalms 31:11). Kingdom, as it is written: “Judah said: The strength of the bearer is failing, and the dirt is abundant; we cannot build the wall” (Nehemiah 4:4).164They could not rebuild the walls of Jerusalem due to their enemies. The kingdom of Babylon is representative of oppressive enemies.“The Lord delivered me into the hands of those against whom I cannot stand.” The Rabbis say: This is a bad wife who has a costly marriage contract.Rav Huna said: “The man became a living soul” (Genesis 2:7). He rendered him a slave bound to himself. If he does not exert himself, he does not eat. That is the opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina, as Rabbi Ḥanina said: “The Lord delivered me into the hands of those against whom I cannot stand.” “Into the hands of those against whom I cannot stand”—if I do not exert myself during the day, at night, “I cannot stand.”
“The Lord trampled all my mighty in my midst; He proclaimed a festival against me to break my young men; the Lord has trodden the maiden daughter of Judah in a winepress” (Lamentations 1:15).“The Lord trampled [sila] all my mighty,” they were made to be bowed, like a stalk of grain before [the enemies]. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: In bar Gamza they call a stalk of grain, comb [sarakei]. Rabbi Levi said: In Arabia they call a comb, curler [mesalsela].165Thus, the word sila in the verse implies something that is curled or bent over. “He proclaimed a festival against me to break my young men.” We find that the expulsion of the young men is as calamitous as the destruction of the Temple, as it is written: “the Lord has trodden the maiden daughter of Judah in a winepress.”166The midrash interprets this phrase as  a reference to the destruction of the Temple; see, similarly, Sanhedrin 96b. Likewise, He proclaimed a festival against me to break my young men.”
“For these I weep, my eye, my eye sheds water; for a comforter, restorer of my soul, has grown distant from me; my children have become desolate, because the enemy has prevailed” (Lamentations 1:16).“For these I weep.” Vespasian filled three ships with the prominent ones of Jerusalem, in order to place them in the brothels of Rome. They stood and said: ‘Is it not enough that we angered Him in His Temple, that [we shall do so] even outside of Israel?’ They said to the women: ‘Do you consent to this?’167The Jewish men, who were being brought to Rome for Roman men to engage with them in homosexual relations, asked the Jewish women, who were being transported to Rome for Roman men to engage with them in heterosexual relations. They said to them: ‘No.’ They said: ‘If those for whom it is the natural way are unwilling, for us, all the more so. Would you say that if we cast ourselves into the sea, we will come to life in the World to Come?’ Immediately, the Holy One blessed be He enlightened their eyes to this verse: “The Lord said: I will return them from Bashan; I will return them from the depths of the sea” (Psalms 68:23). “I will return them from Bashan,” from between the teeth of lions.168Bashan is a portmanteau of bein shinei—between the teeth. “I will return them from the depths of the sea,” in its plain sense.The first group stood and said: “Had we forgotten the name of our God and stretched out our palms to a strange god” (Psalms 44:21), and they cast themselves into the sea. The second group stood and said: “For we are killed all day long for You” (Psalms 44:23), and they cast themselves into the sea. The third group stood and said: “Would not God have discovered it, as He knows the secrets of the heart” (Psalms 44:22), and they cast themselves into the sea. The Divine Presence was crying out and saying: “For these I weep.”Hadrian, may his bones be crushed, deployed three garrisons, one in Ḥamat, one in Kefar Lekitaya, and one in Beit El of Judah. He said: ‘One who flees from here will be apprehended there, and one who flees from there will be apprehended here.’ He would dispatch heralds who would proclaim and say: ‘Wherever there are Jews, let them come, as the king wishes to give them his word.’ The heralds would announce it to them and they would capture the Jews. That is what is written: “Ephraim was like a foolish dove, without understanding…” (Hosea 7:11). To one who questioned, they would respond: ‘Come and request that you not be taken.’169The heralds told the Jews to request of Hadrian that they be allowed to stay in the Land of Israel and not be taken into captivity (Matnot Kehuna). Those who were discerning and observed, did not go out. And those who did not observe, they all entered into the Beit Rimon Valley. He said to the captain of his guard: ‘Until I eat the edge of this loaf and this thigh of a rooster, I will seek one of them and will not find.’170He commanded his officer to immediately kill them all. Immediately, he surrounded them with his legions and killed them, and their blood was bursting forth like a river until it reached Cypress. The Divine Presence was crying out and saying: “For these I weep.”Those who remained in hiding, some of them would eat the flesh of those who had been slain. Each day, one of them would go out and bring [a corpse] to them and they would eat. One day, one said: ‘Let one of the people from among us go. If he finds something, he will bring it and we will eat.’ When he went out he found his father, who had been slain. He took him, concealed him, and placed a marker over him. He came back and said to them: ‘I did not find anything.’ They said: ‘Let another person go, if he finds something, he will bring it and we will eat.’ When that person went out, he followed the odor and found the one who was slain. He brought him and they ate him. Once they ate, [the first man] said to him: ‘From where did you bring this slain person?’ He said to him: ‘From such and such corner.’ He said to him: ‘And what marker was placed upon it?’ He said to him: ‘Such and such marker.’ His son responded and said: ‘Woe is it for this man, who ate of the flesh of his father,’ to realize what is stated: “Therefore, fathers will eat sons in your midst, [and sons will eat their fathers]” (Ezekiel 5:10).The wife of Trajan, may his bones be crushed, gave birth on the night of the Ninth of Av and all Israel was mourning. The baby died on Hanukkah. The Israelites said: ‘Shall we kindle or shall we not kindle?’ They said: ‘We shall kindle, and anything that he seeks to inflict upon us, let him inflict.’ They kindled.[People] went and slandered them to Trajan’s wife: ‘These Jews, when you gave birth they were mourning, and when the baby died they kindled lights.’ She sent a letter to her husband: ‘Instead of subduing the barbarians, come and subdue these Jews who have rebelled against you.’ He boarded the ship and calculated that he would arrive in ten days, but the wind brought him in five days. He arrived and found them, that they were engaged in this verse: “The Lord will bring a nation against you from afar, from the end of the earth, as the eagle will swoop” (Deuteronomy 28:49). He said to them: ‘I am the eagle, as I calculated that I would arrive in ten days and the wind brought me in five days.’ His legions surrounded them and killed them.He said to the women: ‘Submit to my legions, and if not, I will do to you just what I did to the men.’171He threatened to have them killed if they would not submit to intercourse with his legions. They said to him: ‘Do to the inferiors what you did to the superiors.’172Do to us what you did to the men. Immediately, his legions surrounded them and killed them and the blood of these and the blood of those intermingled, and their blood was bursting forth like a river until it reached Cyprus. The Divine Presence was crying out and saying: “For these I weep.”
There was an incident involving the two children of Tzadok the priest, who were taken captive, one male and one female. This one fell to a certain officer and that one fell to a certain officer. This one went to a prostitute and gave her the male, and this one went to a storekeeper and gave him the female in exchange for wine, to realize what is written: “They gave the boy for the prostitute and sold the girl for wine, and drank” (Joel 4:3).Days later, that prostitute brought that lad to the storekeeper. She said to him: ‘Since I have a lad who resembles that young woman, do you not wish to marry one to the other and what emerges from them will be divided between us?’ He said to her: ‘Yes.’ Immediately, they took them and placed them in a room. The young woman began weeping. He said to her: ‘Young woman, why are you weeping?’ She said to him: ‘How shall I not weep, when the daughter of the High Priest is going to marry a slave?’ He said to her: ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She said to him: ‘I am the daughter of Tzadok the priest.’ He said to her: ‘Where are you residing?’ She said to him: ‘In the upper marketplace.’ He said to her: ‘What mark is there on your residence?’ She said to him: ‘Such and such mark.’ He said to her: ‘Do you have a brother or a sister?’ She said: ‘I have one brother and he has a certain mole on his shoulder. When he would come from school, I would bare it and kiss it.’ He said to her: ‘If you would see him would you be able to identify him?’ She said to him: ‘Yes.’ He revealed himself and they recognized each other. They were hugging each other and kissing each other until their souls departed. The Divine Presence was crying out and saying: “For these I weep.”
There was an incident involving Miriam bat Baitus, whom Yehoshua ben Gamla betrothed [to him], and the king appointed him to be the High Priest.173He was appointed to this position because his wealthy wife paid an exorbitant sum to bribe the king to make the appointment. One time, she entered [the Temple] to observe, saying: ‘I will go and see him when he reads the Torah on Yom Kippur in the Temple.’ [Her servants] laid out carpets for her from the entrance of her house to the entrance of the Temple so that her feet would not become irritated. Nevertheless, her feet became irritated. When Yehoshua, her husband, died, the Sages alloted two se’a of wine each day for her.174This was part of her allotment from her husband’s estate. But did we not learn: One does not apportion wine to a woman? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: [Because] it leads to licentiousness, just as it says: “Licentiousness, wine, and new wine will have captured the heart” (Hosea 4:11). Rabbi Yeḥizkiya and Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: For her cooked dishes.175It is permitted to allot wine for cooking, it is prohibited for drinking. They allotted this significant amount of wine daily for the cooked dishes of her household, which demonstrates her immense wealth. Moreover, we learned: If she was nursing, one diminishes her handiwork and adds to her sustenance. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: What does one add? Wine, because wine increases the milk.176This is another reason it is permitted to allot wine to a woman, and may have been the reason Miriam bat Baitus was allotted wine. Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Tzadok said: I will see the consolation,177This was an expression of an oath, short for ‘may I not see the consolation of Jerusalem if I did not see such-and-such.’ if I did not see that they tied her hair to the tails of Arabian horses, and they had them pull her from Jerusalem to Lod. I read in her regard: “The tender and delicate woman among you…” (Deuteronomy 28:56).
There was an incident involving Miriam daughter of Nakdimon for whom the Sages alloted five hundred gold dinars for a basket of perfume each day. She nonetheless stood and cursed them and said to them: ‘Allot that to your daughters!’178She viewed this huge sum as  insufficient. Rabbi Aḥa said: ‘We, too, answered amen after her.’179From the perspective of the Sages it was a huge sum. Rabbi Elazar said: I will see the consolation if I did not see her gathering barley under the hooves of horses in Akko. I read in her regard this verse: “If you do not know, the fairest among women, go you out in the footsteps of the sheep and herd your kids [gediyotayikh]” (Song of Songs 1:8). Do not read gediyotayikh, but rather, your corpses [geviyotayikh].
There was an incident involving Miriam bat Baitus, the baker, who was taken captive and redeemed in Akko. They purchased a mantle for her.180The local Jewish community ransomed her from captivity and bought her a garment. She went to wash it in the sea and a wave came and swept it away. They purchased her another. She went to wash it in the sea and a wave came and swept it away. They sought to purchase her another. She said to them: ‘Allow the Collector to collect His debt.’ Since she accepted her judgment, the Holy One blessed be He motioned to the sea and it produced her garments for her.
There was an incident involving Miriam daughter of the baker, who was taken captive with her seven sons. The emperor took them and placed them behind seven partitions. He brought the first and said to him: ‘Prostrate yourself to the idol.’ He said to him: ‘God forbid, I will not prostrate myself to the idol.’ He said to him: ‘Why?’ [He responded:] ‘Because so it is written in our Torah: “I am the Lord your God”’ (Exodus 20:2). Immediately, he took him out and executed him.He took out the second and said to him: ‘Prostrate yourself to the idol.’ He said to him: ‘God forbid, my brother did not prostrate himself and I will not prostrate myself.’ He said to him: ‘Why?’ He said to him: ‘Because so it is written in our Torah: “You shall have no other gods before Me”’ (Exodus 20:3). Immediately, he issued a decree against him and they executed him. He took out the third and said to him: ‘Prostrate yourself to the idol.’ He said to him: ‘I will not prostrate myself.’ He said to him: ‘Why?’ He said to him: ‘Because so it is written in our Torah: “For you shall not prostrate yourself to another god”’ (Exodus 34:14). Immediately, he issued a decree against him and they executed him. He took out the fourth and [the son] recited his verse: “One who sacrifices to gods shall be destroyed” (Exodus 22:19). He issued a decree against him and they executed him. He took out the fifth and he, too, recited his verse: “Hear Israel, the Lord is our God the Lord is one” (Deuteronomy 6:4). Immediately, he issued a decree against him and they executed him. He took out the sixth and he, too, recited his verse: “For the Lord your God is in your midst, a God great and awesome” (Deuteronomy 7:21). Immediately, he issued a decree against him and they executed him.He took out the seventh, who was the youngest of them all. He said: ‘My son, prostrate yourself to the idol.’ He said to him: ‘God forbid.’ He said to him: ‘Why?’ He said to him: ‘Because so it is written in our Torah: “You shall know this day, and restore to your heart, that the Lord, He is the God in the heavens above and upon the earth below, there is no other” (Deuteronomy 4:39). Moreover, we took an oath to our God that we will not exchange Him for another God, as it is stated: “You have exalted the Lord today [to be your God]” (Deuteronomy 26:17). And just as we took an oath to Him, so He took an oath that He would not exchange us for a different nation, as it is stated: “The Lord has exalted you today [to be a people of distinction for Him]”’ (Deuteronomy 26:18).The emperor said to him: ‘Your brothers had full days, full lives, and experienced goodness, but you are young, you have not had full days, you have not had a full life, and you have never experienced goodness. Prostrate yourself to the idol and I will do good things for you.’ He said to him: ‘It is written in our Torah: “The Lord will reign forever” (Exodus 15:18). And it says: “The Lord is king forever, nations have been eliminated from His land” (Psalms 10:16). You will cease and His enemies will cease. Flesh and blood lives today and dies tomorrow, is wealthy today and poor tomorrow; but the Holy One blessed be He lives and persists forever and for all time.’ The emperor said to him: ‘See your brothers slain before you. I am casting my ring to the ground before the idol, lift it so everyone will know that you heeded my voice.’ He said to him: ‘It is a shame for you, emperor; if you fear people, who are your equivalent, will I not fear the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, the eternal God?’ He said to him: ‘Is there a God in the world?’ He said to him: ‘Woe are you, emperor, have you seen a world without a master?’He said to him: ‘Does your God have a mouth?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have a mouth but cannot speak” (Psalms 115:5). Regarding our God it is written: “By the word of the Lord the heavens were made; [by the breath of His mouth, all their hosts]”’ (Psalms 33:6).He said to him: ‘Does your God have eyes?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have eyes but cannot see” (Psalms 115:5). Regarding our God it is written: “They are the eyes of the Lord ranging throughout the land”’ (Zechariah 4:10).He said to him: ‘Does your God have ears?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have ears but cannot hear” (Psalms 115:6). Regarding our God it is written: “The Lord listened and heard”’ (Malachi 3:16).He said to him: ‘Does your God have a nose?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have a nose but cannot smell” (Psalms 115:6). Regarding our God it is written: “The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma”’ (Genesis 8:21).He said to him: ‘Does your God have hands?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have hands but cannot feel” (Psalms 115:7). Regarding our God it is written: “My hand, too, laid the foundation”’ (Isaiah 48:13).He said to him: ‘Does your God have feet?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They have feet but cannot walk” (Psalms 115:7). Regarding our God it is written: “His feet will stand that day on the Mount of Olives”’ (Zechariah 14:4).He said to him: ‘Does your God have a throat?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding your gods it is written: “They cannot produce sound with their throats” (Psalms 115:7). Regarding our God it is written: “Sound emerges from His mouth”’ (Job 37:2).He said to him: ‘If there are all these attributes in your God, why does He not rescue you from my hand, like He rescued Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya from the hand of Nebuchadnezzar?’ He said to him: ‘Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya were upright, and Nebuchadnezzar was a king worthy of having a miracle performed through him. But you are not worthy, and we have been condemned to death at the hand of Heaven. If you do not execute us, there are many executioners for the Omnipresent, many wolves, lions, snakes, leopards, and scorpions to attack us and kill us. But ultimately, the Holy One blessed be He is destined to exact retribution from you for our blood.’ Immediately, he issued a decree against him to execute him.His mother said to him: ‘By the life of your head, emperor, give me my son and I will hug him and kiss him.’ He gave him to her, and she bared her breasts and nursed him with her milk. She said to him: ‘By the life of your head, emperor, execute me first and then execute him.’ The emperor said to her: ‘I will not heed you because it is written in your Torah: “An ox or a sheep, it and its offspring you shall not slaughter on one day”’ (Leviticus 22:28). She said to him: ‘You absolute fool, have you already fulfilled all the mitzvot and only this one remains?’ Immediately, he commanded to execute [the son]. His mother fell upon him and was hugging him and kissing him. She said to him: ‘My son, go to Abraham your patriarch and say to him: So said my mother: Do not be overly impressed with yourself and say: I built an altar and sacrificed Isaac, my son. My mother built seven altars and sacrificed seven sons on one day. Yours was an ordeal, mine was an action.’181Your was a test to see if you were willing to sacrifice your son, but you did not actually sacrifice him. My sons were actually killed. While she was hugging him and kissing him, he issued a decree against him and they executed him upon her. When he was executed, the Sages calculated the age of that child and it was discovered that he was two years, six months, and six and one half hours. At that moment, all the nations of the world screamed out and said: ‘What is the God of these people doing to them that they are killed on His behalf all the time?’ In their regard it is written: “For we are killed all day long for You” (Psalms 44:23).Sometime later, that woman went mad and she fell from the roof and died, to realize what is stated: “She who bore seven is miserable” (Jeremiah 15:9). A Divine Voice was calling out, saying: “The mother of the children is joyful” (Psalms 113:9). The Divine Spirit was crying out and saying: “For these I weep.”
There was an incident involving Doeg ben Yosef who died and left a young son to his mother. She would measure him in handbreadths and donate his weight in gold to the Temple182Literally, to Heaven. each and every year. When the siege encircled Jerusalem, his mother slaughterd him with her own hands and ate him: Jeremiah was lamenting before the Omnipresent and saying: “Shall women eat their fruit, the infants of their nurturing?” (Lamentations 2:20). The Divine Spirit responded to him: “Shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the Temple of the Lord?” (Lamentations 2:20). This is Zekharya ben Yehoyada.183See Eikha Rabba, Prologue, 23.Another matter, “for these I weep,” Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: For the departure of intelligence and for the departure of the Divine Presence. Is it possible that Zedekiah saw others plucking out his eyes and he did not have the intelligence to smash his head against the wall until his soul departed, but he rather caused his sons to be slaughtered before his eyes?184Nebuchadnezzar had Zedekiah’s sons slaughtered before his eyes, and then had Zedekiah’s eyes blinded (II Kings 25:7). According to the Sages, they first inserted iron rods into his eyes but had not yet blinded him; they finished blinding him only after he saw his sons slaughtered (Tanḥuma, Vaetḥanan 1). The midrash here asks why Zedekiah did not kill himself to spare himself this torture.  Rather, regarding that moment it is stated: “The heart of the king and the heart of the princes will fail…” (Jeremiah 4:9). Rabbi Neḥemya said: For the departure of priesthood and kingship. That is what is written: “These are the two anointed men who attend the Lord of all the land” (Zechariah 4:14); these are Aaron and David. Aaron is demanding his priesthood and David is demanding his kingdom.Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: For dereliction in the study of Torah.185This opinions interprets the verse “for these I weep” to mean due to these sins, namely the dereliction in the study of Torah. That is what is written: “These are the statutes and the ordinances” (Deuteronomy 12:1).186This verse is stated regarding the Torah. The word “these” in Lamentations is thus connected to the words of Torah, referred to as “these” in Deuteronomy. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: For idol worship. That is what is written: “These are your gods, Israel” (Exodus 32:4). Zavdi ben Levi said: For the abrogation of the offerings. That is what is written: “These you shall perform to the Lord on your appointed days” (Numbers 29:39). The Rabbis said: For the abrogation of the [non-priestly] watches.187The reference is to the groups of Israelites, corresponding to the twenty-four priestly watches, who would spend the week in prayer and Torah study so that the Temple service would be pleasing to God; see Taanit 26a. What benefit does the world have from the watches? On Monday they would fast on behalf of the seafarers. On Tuesday they would fast on behalf of the wayfarers. On Wednesday they would fast on behalf of the children, so that diphtheria would not afflict their mouths and cause them to die. On Thursday they would fast on behalf of the pregnant women, that they would not miscarry, and on behalf of the nursing women, that their children should not die. But is it not so that one may not fast on behalf of two matters simultaneously, as it is written: “We fasted and we requested from our God about this”? (Ezra 8:23). And a verse in Daniel says: “For them to request mercy from before the God of heaven regarding this secret” (Daniel 2:18), and not regarding two.188Both verses mention requesting from God regarding “this,” in singular. Rather, it is like that which Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: For drought and exile one fasts for both of them simultaneously.189They are related, because due to famine people wander from their homes in search of food. Similarly, miscarriage and the death of infants are closely enough related that one can pray regarding both simultaneously. However, one does not fast on the day before Shabbat or on the day following Shabbat, in deference to Shabbat.“My eye, my eye sheds water.” Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a doctor who had pain in one eye. He said: ‘Let my eye weep for my eye.’ So too, Israel is called the eye of the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “For the eye of man and all the tribes of Israel is toward the Lord” (Zechariah 9:1). As it were, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let My eye weep for My eye.’“For a comforter, restorer of my soul, has grown distant from me.” What is the name of the messianic king? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: The Lord is his name, as it is stated: “This is his name that they will call him: The Lord is our righteousness” (Jeremiah 23:6). As Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It is good for a province when its name is like that of its king, and the name of its king is like that of its God. It is good for a province when its name is like that of its king, as it is written: “The name of the city from that day shall be: The Lord is there” (Ezekiel 48:35). The name of its king like the name of its God, as it is stated: “This is his name that they will call him: The Lord is our righteousness” (Jeremiah 23:6).Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: His name is Tzemaḥ, as it is stated: “Behold a man, Tzemaḥ is his name, and he will sprout [yitzmaḥ]” (Zechariah 6:12). Rabbi Yudan said: Menaḥem is his name, as it is stated: “For a comforter [menaḥem]…has grown distant from me.” Rabbi Ḥanina said: And they do not disagree; the numerical value of this equals the numerical value of that, Menaḥem equals Tzemaḥ.190Menaḥem: mem – 40, nun – 50, ḥet – 8, mem – 40 = 138. Tzemaḥ: tzadi – 90, mem – 40, ḥet – 8 = 138. The following supports that [statement] of Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Aivu: There was an incident involving a certain person who was plowing. One of his oxen lowed. A certain Arab passed near him and said to him: ‘What are you?’ He said to him: ‘I am a Jew.’ He said to him: ‘Unharness your ox, untie your plow.’ He said to him: ‘Why?’ He said to him: ‘The Temple of the Jews is destroyed.’191Therefore, you should mourn rather than work your field. He said to him: ‘How do you know?’ He said to him: ‘I know it from the lowing of your ox.’ While he was still conversing with him, it lowed again. He said to him: ‘Harness your ox, tie your plow, as the redeemer of the Jews was born.’ He said to him: ‘What is his name?’ He said to him: ‘His name is Menaḥem.’ ‘What is his father’s name?’ He said to him: ‘Hezekiah.’ He said to him: ‘Where do they live?’ He said to him: ‘In Birat Arva, that is in Bethlehem of Judah.’ That man sold his oxen, sold his plow, and became a seller of felt garments for children. He would enter a city and leave a city, enter a province and leave a province, until he arrived there.All of the women of the village came to purchase from him, but the mother of a certain child did not purchase from him. He said to her: ‘Why are you not purchasing children’s garments of felt?’ She said to him: ‘Because my child has a harsh fate.’ He said to her: ‘Why?’ She said to him: ‘Because upon his arrival, the Temple was destroyed.’192The Temple was destroyed on the day he was born. He said to her: ‘We rely on the Master of the universe that upon his arrival it was destroyed and upon his arrival it will be rebuilt.’ He said to her: ‘Take one of these felt garments for your child, I will come some time later to your house and collect your payment.’ She took it and she went. Some time later that man said: ‘I will go and see how that child is doing.’ He came to her, he said to her: ‘How is the child doing?’ She said to him: ‘Did I not say to you that he has a harsh fate? Even upon his arrival there was a foreboding omen. Since that time, winds and storms carried him away.’ He said to her: ‘Did I not tell you that upon his arrival it was destroyed and upon his arrival it will be rebuilt?’193He was carried away by the wind because he is destined to serve a purpose in a supernatural manner, and bring about the building of the Temple.Rabbi Avun said: Why must I learn this from Arabs, is it not an explicit verse? As it is written: “The Lebanon will fall by a mighty one” (Isaiah 10:34), and it is written immediately thereafter: “A branch will emerge from the trunk of Yishai and a shoot will sprout from his roots” (Isaiah 11:1).The school of Rabbi Sheila said: Shilo is the name of Messiah, as it is stated: “Until Shilo will come” (Genesis 49:10); Sheila is written.194The word Shilo in the verse is spelled with a heh at the end rather than a vav, such that it can also be read Sheila. This was stated by Rabbi Sheila’s students, who felt that if their generation was worthy, their mentor would be the messiah (Etz Yosef). The school of Rabbi Ḥanina said: Ḥanina is his name, as it is stated: “As I will not grant you clemency [ḥanina]” (Jeremiah 16:13). The school of Rabbi Yanai said: Yinon is his name, as it is written: “May his name be praised [yinon] as long as the sun shines” (Psalms 72:17). Rabbi Beivai of Sanegurya said: His name is Nehira, as it is stated: “Light [nehora] rests with Him” (Daniel 2:22), nehira is written. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel ben Rabbi Yitzḥak: If the messianic king is from the living, his name is David, and if he is from the dead, his name is David. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: I will say his source: “He increases deliverance to His king, shows kindness to His anointed, [to David and to his descendants, eternally]” (Psalms 18:51). “And to David” is not written here, but rather “to David and his descendants.”195The verse says: To His anointed [meshiḥo], to David, identifying David as the messiah.“My children have become desolate, because the enemy has prevailed.” Rabbi Aivu said: Like that shell of the gourd; the more [the shell] grows, the smaller [the fruit] is.196The greater the percentage of the total fruit is shell, the smaller the edible fruit is (Arukh). The point is that the greater the success of the enemy, the greater the desolation of Israel.  Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Like this pig; the more that its offspring grow, the smaller it gets.197Its energy is sapped by nursing its young (Matnot Kehuna).
“Zion spread her hands, there was no comforter for her; the Lord has commanded for Jacob that her adversaries surround her. Jerusalem has become like a pariah among them” (Lamentations 1:17).“Zion spread her hands.” It is written: “Would that my head was water and my eyes a source of tears, [and I would weep day and night]” (Jeremiah 8:23). Who said this verse? If you say it was Jeremiah, would it be possible for him not to eat? Would it be possible for him not to sleep? Rather, who said it? One before whom there is neither eating nor sleeping, as it is written: “Behold, the Guardian of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps” (Psalms 121:4). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Levi: It is written: “God said: Let the water…pool [yikavu]” (Genesis 1:9). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let the water hope [yekavu] to participate in what I am destined to do with them.’ Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: This is analogous to a king who built palaces, and he settled mute residents in them. Each day they would rise early and inquire after the wellbeing of the king, lauding him with gestures with their fingers. The king said: ‘If these people, who are mute, laud me in this manner, if they were able to speak, all the more so.’ What did he do? He settled residents who could speak in [the palaces]. They arose and took possession of the king’s palace and said: ‘This palace is only ours.’ At that moment, the king said: ‘Let the world be restored to the way that it was.’ So too, at the beginning of the creation of the world, [God’s] praises would ascend only from the water. That is what is written: “It is from the sound of many waters, the mighty breakers of the sea” (Psalms 93:4). What would they say? “The Lord is mighty on high” (Psalms 93:4). At that time, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If those who do not have a mouth, a tongue, speech, or articulation, laud me in this way, when I create people, all the more so.’ When He created people, the generation of Enosh and the generation of the Flood stood and rebelled against Him. At that time, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let the world be restored to the way that it was, as it was stated: “The rain was upon the earth”’ (Genesis 7:12).198God brought the Flood in order to return the world to a state in which water covered the face of the earth.Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: [This is analogous] to one who had a staff and a wicker basket.199He was poor. He garnered wealth and purchased a flock. Wolves entered and mauled them. That shepherd said: ‘I will return to that staff and to that wicker basket.’ So too, the shepherd is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “Shepherd of Israel, listen! Appear to us, You who led Joseph like a flock, You who sit enthroned above the cherubs” (Psalms 80:2). The flock is Israel, as it is stated: “You are my flock, the flock of My pasture” (Ezekiel 34:31). The wolves who entered His flock and mauled them are the enemies who entered the Temple. At that moment the Holy One blessed be He said: “Would that my head was water and my eyes a source of tears [and I would weep day and night]” (Jeremiah 8:23).It is written: “These I remember, and pour out my soul: [When I used to go with a throng of people in a procession [edadem] to the House of God, a celebrating multitude with voice of song and thanksgiving]” (Psalms 42:5). The congregation of Israel was saying before the Holy One blessed be He: In the past, I would ascend to Jerusalem and the roads were smoothed, and now they are overgrown, as it is stated: “Therefore, behold, I am hedging your way with thorns” (Hosea 2:8).Another matter, “these I remember,” in the past I would ascend and the trees would provide shade over my head, and now it is exposed to the sun.“These I remember,” in the past I would ascend in the shadow of the Holy One blessed be He, and now in the shadow of the kingdoms.“These I remember.” The emperor Vespasian deployed sentries eighteen mil from Pumim. They would question the pilgrims and say to them: ‘With whom are your loyalties?’ They would say to them: ‘We are loyal to Vespasian, Trajan, Hadrian.’ Rabbi Berekhya said: The congregation of Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘In the past I would ascend with baskets of first fruits on my head early in the morning, as they would say: “Arise and let us ascend to Zion” (Jeremiah 31:6). On the roads, they would say: “Our feet were standing at your gates, Jerusalem” (Psalms 122:2). On the Temple Mount, what would they say? “Halleluya. Praise the Almighty in His holy place” (Psalms 150:1). In the Temple courtyard, what would they say? “Let all who breathe praise the Lord” (Psalms 150:6). But now, we are silent [edadem]; we ascend in silence and we descend in silence.’“These I remember.” In the past, I would ascend with songs and psalms before the Holy One blessed be He, just as it says: “With voice of song and thanksgiving” (Psalms 42:5). But now, I ascend with weeping and I descend with weeping.“These I remember.” In the past, I would ascend with many multitudes in celebration, just as it says: “A celebrating multitude” (Psalms 42:5). Rabbi Levi said: Like this flowing spring that does not cease during the day and at night. But now, I ascend clandestinely and descend clandestinely. “These I remember, and pour out my soul…”Another matter, “Zion spread her hands.” Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: [This is analogous] to a king who had a son. He was striking him and [the son] said: ‘I sinned.’ He [continued] striking him and [the son] said: ‘I sinned and I have been foolish.’ He continued striking him until [the son] extended his ten fingers before him.200He did this as a sign of contrition, as though to say I have sinned and cannot even express my guilt, or I have sinned and can no longer bear the suffering of my beating. So too, the Holy One blessed be He was afflicting Jerusalem, and she said: ‘I sinned,’ until, “Zion spread her hands.”“There was no [ein] comforter for her,” Rabbi Levi said: Any place that it is stated: “Has no [ein],” ultimately it will have. “Sarai was barren, she had no [ein] child” (Genesis 11:30), but ultimately she had, as it is stated: “The Lord remembered Sarah” (Genesis 21:1). Similarly, “Hannah had no [ein] children” (I Samuel 1:2), and ultimately she had, as it is stated: “For the Lord remembered Hannah” (I Samuel 2:21). Similarly, “she is Zion, she has no one [ein] seeking her” (Jeremiah 30:17), and ultimately she had, as it is stated: “A redeemer will come to Zion” (Isaiah 59:20). So, too, it says: “She has no [ein] comforter,” and ultimately she has, as it is stated: “I, it is I, who am your Comforter” (Isaiah 51:12).“The Lord has commanded for Jacob that her adversaries surround her,” such as Ḥalmish for Naveh, Kistera for Haifa, Susita for Tiberias, Jericho for Neve’eden, Lod for Ono.201In Roman times, the first of each of these pairs of cities was populated by gentiles, who would persecute the Jews living in the adjacent city. “Jerusalem has become like a pariah among them,” she became distanced.
“The Lord is righteous, for I have defied His word. Hear now all you peoples, and see my pain: My young women and young men have gone into captivity” (Lamentations 1:18).“The Lord is righteous, for I have defied His word.” Who said this verse? Yoshiyahu said it. That is what is written: “After all this, when Yoshiyahu had established the House, Nekho king of Egypt came up to wage war at Karkemish on the Euphrates,” (II Chronicles 35:20), Karkasyon on the Euphrates. “[Yoshiyahu went out toward him.] He sent emissaries to him, saying: What is there between me and you, king of Judah? It is not against you today, but against the house with which I have war, and God has said that I should make haste” (II Chronicles 35:20–21). It is by the word of the Holy One blessed be He that I am ascending. “Restrain yourself from god who is with me” (II Chronicles 35:21), this is an expression of idol worship. “Yoshiyahu did not turn his face from him…and did not heed the words of Nekho from the mouth of God” (II Chronicles 35:22), this [alludes to] Jeremiah, who said to Yoshiyahu: ‘So I received from my teacher Isaiah: “I will provoke Egypt against Egypt”’ (Isaiah 19:2). He did not heed him. Rather, he said to him: ‘Did Moses, the teacher of your teacher, not say this: “A sword will not pass in the land” (Leviticus 26:6)? And the sword of that wicked one is passing in my land and my borders.’ But he did not realize that his entire generation was idol worshippers. He would send a pair of students to eradicate idol worship from their houses, but they would enter and not find anything. When they would go out [the residents] would say: ‘Close the doors,’ and when they would close the doors they would see it.202There were double doors leading into the house. Half the idol was on one door and half on the other. The halves did not look like anything separately, but when the doors were closed, the idol was visible. They would say of them: The one who came to repair is the one who came and ruined.203Although they divided the idol when they opened the doors, they put it back together when they closed the doors. Therefore: “The archers shot King Yoshiyahu” (II Chronicles 35:23). Rabbi Manei said: They fired three hundred arrows into him until his body became like a sieve. Jeremiah was listening to him to ascertain what he was saying:204He was listening to what Yoshiyahu was saying as he died. What was he saying? “The Lord is righteous, for I have defied His word,” His mouth and the mouth of his agent.
“I called to my lovers, they deceived me; my priests and my elders perished in the city while they sought food for themselves to restore their souls” (Lamentations 1:19).“I called to my lovers, they deceived me.” The Rabbis interpreted the verse regarding false prophets, who would cause their idol worship to be beloved to me.205The rabbis interpret the term me’ahavai, generally translated “my lovers” to mean “those who made [idols] beloved to me.” The verse is written from the perspective of Zion. “They deceived me,” they, too, deceived me. They did not cease prophesying falsely about me until they caused me to be exiled from my place, as it is stated: “They envisioned for you prophecies of futility and deviance [umaduḥim]” (Lamentations 2:14); it is written madiḥam.206The word maduḥim is written without a yod, such that it can be read madiḥam, meaning those who have pushed them into exile.Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai interpreted the verse regarding the true prophets, who would cause me to be beloved to the Holy One blessed be He. “They deceived me,” as they would deceive me and say to me: Separate teruma and tithes. But are there teruma and tithes in Babylon? Rather, it was in order to cause me to be beloved to the Holy One blessed be He. That is what Jeremiah says: “Establish signposts [tziyunim] for you” (Jeremiah 31:20). Distinguish yourself via mitzvot with which Israel was distinguished.207Therefore, separate teruma and tithes even in Babylon despite the fact that these mitzvot apply by Torah law only in the Land of Israel.“Place landmarks for you” (Jeremiah 31:20), this is the destruction of the Temple.208A landmark serves as a marker or reminder of something. This is understood as an allusion to the destruction of the Temple, which must be remembered. Likewise it says: “If I forget you, Jerusalem, let my right hand lose its power” (Psalms 137:5). “Note the highway, the path that you walked [halakht]” (Jeremiah 31:20). Rabbi Ḥiyya said: “I walked [halakhti]” is written.209The verse in Jeremiah is written “the path that I walked,” but it is traditionally read as though it says “the path that you walked.” You find that when Israel was exiled to Babylon, what is written? “For your sake, I sent to Babylon” (Isaiah 43:14).210The midrash interprets this to mean that God sent His own Divine Presence with them into exile. Alternatively, the term “I sent [shilaḥti]” can be read shulaḥti, meaning I was sent. They were exiled to Eilam; the Divine Presence was with them, as it is written: “I will place My throne in Eilam” (Jeremiah 49:38). They were exiled to Greece; the Divine Presence was with them, as it is written: “I will rouse your children, Zion, against your children, Greece” (Zechariah 9:13), and it is written thereafter: “The Lord will appear over them…” (Zechariah 9:14). That is why it is written: “The path that I walked.”Another matter, “Note the highway, the path that you walked.” Jeremiah said to them: ‘See the paths on which you have walked, and repent, as it is written: “Return, maiden of Israel” (Jeremiah 31:20), and you will immediately return to your cities, as it is written: “Return to these, your cities” (Jeremiah 31:20).
“See, Lord, for I am in distress, my innards burn, my heart overturned within me, for I have been defiant. Outside the sword bereaves; in the house, it is like death” (Lamentations 1:20).“See, Lord, for I am in distress, my innards burn [ḥamarmaru],” Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ḥanina said: He rendered them filled with parasitic worms [morot]. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: He rendered them filled with clumps.211The term ḥamarim can mean piles or clumps (see Exodus 8:10). “My heart overturned within me.” Why? “For I have been defiant.” “Outside the sword bereaves; in the house, it is like death.” This is what Moses said: “Outside, the sword will bereave, and terror within” (Deuteronomy 32:25).
“They heard that I sigh; there is no comforter for me; all my enemies heard of my misfortune, were glad because You acted. May You bring the day that You proclaimed, and they will be like me” (Lamentations 1:21).“They heard that I sigh.” Rabbi Yehoshua interpreted the verse regarding Aaron. You find that when Aaron died, the clouds of glory were dispersed and all Israel gathered to eulogize him. They said: ‘Moses is mourning, Elazar is mourning; who will not mourn?’ Immediately, what is written there? “The Canaanite king of Arad…heard” (Numbers 21:1). And it is written: “He waged war with Israel and he took captive from them” (Numbers 21:1).The Rabbis interpret the verse regarding the destruction of the Temple. You find that wherever Israel sought to flee, [the local population] would turn them in. They sought to flee northward, but they did not allow them to do so. That is what is written: “For three transgressions of Gaza, but for the fourth, I will not relent: For their exiling of an entire exile, to deliver to Edom” (Amos 1:6). They sought to flee eastward, but they did not allow them to do so. That is what is written: “For three transgressions of Tyre, but for the fourth, I will not relent: For their delivering of an entire exile to Edom, and they did not remember the covenant of brothers” (Amos 1:9). They sought to flee westward, but they did not allow them to do so, as it is written: “A prophecy of Arabia: In the forest in Arabia you will stay the night, caravans [of Dedanites]” (Isaiah 21:13).212The implication is that the fleeing exiles were stuck in the forest. The following verses describe how the local population should have greeted them with bread and water, but failed to do so.“Because You acted,” this is analogous to a king who married a noblewoman. He said to her: ‘Do not speak to your friends. Do not borrow from them and do not lend to them.’ Sometime later the king grew angry at her and expelled her from the palace. She circulated among all her neighbors, but they did not receive her, so she returned to the palace. The king said to her: ‘You have been impudent!’213It was impudent of you to return to the palace. The noblewoman said to the king: ‘My lord, had I lent them or borrowed from them a vessel, and I would have grown friendly with them, would they not have received me?’ So too, the Holy One blessed be He said to Israel: ‘You have been impudent!’ They said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, did you not write in Your Torah: “You shall not marry them; your daughter you shall not give to his son, and his daughter you shall not take for your son” (Deuteronomy 7:3)? Had we lent them and taken from them and them from us, and his daughter would be with me or my daughter with him, would they not have received me?’ That is: “Because You acted.”214We are in this predicament because of what You did in issuing these commands. “May You bring the day that You proclaimed, and they will be like me,” in distress, and not like me in relief.215Israel’s distress will ultimately end with redemption.
“Let all their wickedness come before You, and do to them as You did to me for all my transgressions, for my sighs are many and my heart is suffering” (Lamentations 1:22).“Let all their wickedness come before You, and do to them,” bring upon them what You brought upon me. Be exacting with them as You were exacting with me. “And do [veolel] to them,” pluck their infants [olelateihon] as You plucked my infants.“For my sighs are many and my heart is suffering.” You find that in the matter that Israel sinned, with that they were punished, and with that they were comforted. They sinned with rosh, they were punished with rosh, and they were comforted with rosh. They sinned with rosh, as it is written: “Let us appoint a leader [rosh] and return to Egypt” (Numbers 14:4). They were punished with rosh, as it is written: “Every head [rosh] is ill” (Isaiah 1:5). And they are comforted with rosh, as it is written: “Their king passed before them, and the Lord is at their head [berosham]” (Micah 2:13).They sinned with the ear, as it is written: “They made their ears hard of hearing” (Zechariah 7:11). They were punished with the ear, as it is written: “That anyone who hears it, both his ears will ring” (I Samuel 3:11). They are comforted with the ear, as it is written: “Your ears will hear a matter from behind you, saying: [This is the way, walk in it, when you go right and when you go left]” (Isaiah 30:21).They sinned with the eye, as it is written: “Because the daughters of Zion are haughty and they walk with outstretched necks and painted eyes” (Isaiah 3:16). They were punished with the eye, as it is written: “My eye, my eye sheds water” (Lamentations 1:16). They are comforted with the eye, as it is written: “For with their own eyes they will see the return of the Lord to Zion” (Isaiah 52:8).They sinned with af, as it is written: “Behold, they extend the branch to their nose [af]” (Ezekiel 8:17). They were punished with af, as it is written: “I, too [af], will walk with them indifferently” (Leviticus 26:41). They are comforted with af, as it is written: “And despite [ve’af gam] this, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not have spurned them and will not have rejected them, to destroy them, to violate My covenant with them” (Leviticus 26:44).They sinned with the mouth, as it is written: “Every mouth speaks depravity” (Isaiah 9:16). They were punished with the mouth, as it is written: “They consumed Israel with every mouth” (Isaiah 9:11). They are comforted with the mouth, as it is written: “Then will our mouths be filled with laughter” (Psalms 126:2).They sinned with the tongue, as it is written: “They drew their tongues, their bow of falsehood” (Jeremiah 9:2). They were punished with the tongue, as it is written: “The tongue of the suckling cleaved [to the roof of his mouth in thirst]” (Lamentations 4:4). They are comforted with the tongue, as it is written: “And our tongues with song; [then will they say among the nations: The Lord has done great things for them]” (Psalms 126:2).They sinned with the heart, as it is written: “They made their hearts as adamant, not to hear” (Zechariah 7:12). They were punished with the heart, as it is written: “Every heart is suffering” (Isaiah 1:5). They are comforted with the heart, as it is written: “speak to the heart of Jerusalem” (Isaiah 40:2).They sinned with the hand, as it is written: “Your hands are filled with blood” (Isaiah 1:15). They were punished with the hand, as it is written: “The hands of merciful women cooked their children” (Lamentations 4:10). They are comforted with the hand, as it is written: “The Lord will continue setting His hand again, a second time [to recover the remnant of His people…]” (Isaiah 11:11).They sinned with the foot, as it is written: “For their feet run to evil” (Proverbs 1:16). They were punished with the foot, as it is written: “Before your feet stumble on the mountains of the night (Jeremiah 13:16). They are comforted with the foot, as it is written: “How pleasant are the feet of the herald upon the mountains” (Isaiah 52:7).They sinned with hu, as it is written: “They denied the Lord and said: He [hu] is not” (Jeremiah 5:12). They were punished with hu, as it is written: “He was transformed into their enemy, He [hu] waged war against them” (Isaiah 63:10). They are comforted with hu, as it is written: “I, it is I, who [hu] am your Comforter” (Isaiah 51:12).They sinned with zeh, as it is written: “For this [zeh] man Moses” (Exodus 32:1). They were punished with zeh, as it is written: “For this [zeh] [our heart] is suffering” (Lamentations 5:17). They are comforted with zeh, as it is written: “Behold, this [zeh] is our God, we hoped to Him [that He would save us; this is the Lord to whom we hoped, we will be glad and rejoice in His salvation]” (Isaiah 25:9).They sinned with fire, as it is written: “The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire...[in order to anger Me]” (Jeremiah 7:18). They were punished with fire, as it is written: “From on high He sent fire into my bones” (Lamentations 1:13). They are comforted with fire, as it is written: “I will be for it,216Jerusalem. the utterance of the Lord, a wall of fire all around” (Zechariah 2:9).They sinned with yesh, as it is written: “Is [hayesh] the Lord among us or not?” (Exodus 17:7). They were punished with yesh, as it is written: “Is there any [yesh] pain like my pain?” (Lamentations 1:12). They are comforted with yesh, as it is written: “To bequeath substance [yesh] to those who love me, and I will fill their storehouses” (Proverbs 8:21).They sinned doubly, as it is written: “Jerusalem has committed a sin [ḥet ḥata]” (Lamentations 1:8).217The Hebrew verse employs the word sin [ḥet] twice, such that a literal translation would be “Jerusalem has sinned a sin.” They were punished doubly, as it is written: “For it has received from the hand of the Lord double for all its sins” (Isaiah 40:2). They are comforted doubly, as it is written: “Comfort, comfort [naḥamu naḥamu] My people” (Isaiah 40:1).End of the First Alphabetical Acrostic

Section: Esther_Rabbah
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces”  (Esther 1:1).1What follows is a series of wordplays on the name Aḥashverosh.Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: Who blackened [hishḥir] the faces of Israel like the bottom of a pot. Rabbi Berekhya said: Who weakened [hikḥish] the head of Israel with fasting and abstinence. Rabbi Levi said: Who gave them gall and wormwood to drink [hishka]. Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said: Who sought to undermine the foundation of Israel.2Literally, to undermine the egg of Israel. The wordplay with the name Aḥashverosh is obscure in this case. Perhaps it involves the word הוריש, meaning to dispossess or destroy. Rabbi Taḥlifa bar bar Ḥana said: Who was the brother [aḥ] of a leader [rosh], the brother of Nebuchadnezzar. Was he his brother? Was not this one a Chaldean and that one a Median? Rather, this one canceled the construction of the Temple, and that one destroyed it; therefore, Scripture equated them. That is what is written: “Even one who is lax in his work is brother to a master of destruction.” (Proverbs 18:9). “Even one who is lax in his work,” that is Aḥashverosh, who canceled the construction of the Temple. “Is brother to a master of destruction,” that is Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed the Temple.Alternatively, “Aḥashverosh” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: One said: “Aḥashverosh,” who killed his wife [Vashti] because of his beloved one [Haman]; “that Aḥashverosh,” who killed his beloved one [Haman] because of his wife [Esther]. Rabbi Neḥemya said: “Aḥashverosh,” who canceled the construction of the Temple; “that Aḥashverosh,” who decreed that it should be rebuilt. Was it him who decreed? Was it not Cyrus who decreed? Rather, it is written: “During the first year of King Cyrus” (Ezra 6:3). During that year, all his advisers came to him; they said to him: ‘Your father decreed about it that it shall not be rebuilt, and you decree about it that it shall be rebuilt? Does a king abrogate the decrees of another king?’ He said to them: ‘Bring me the copies of the decrees.’ Immediately, they brought them to him. That is what is written: “A scroll was found in Aḥmeta in the capital” (Ezra 6:2). What was written in it? “Now, issue a decree to cancel” (Ezra 4:21). He said to them: ‘Is ‘forever’ written? It is only written: “Until a decree from me will be issued.” Who can say to me that were my father alive, he would not have built it?’ Therefore, he is included with the prophets; that is what is written: “The elders of the Jews built and prospered [in accordance with the prophecy of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah son of Ido, and built and finished, by the decree of the God of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaḥshasta3The midrash identifies Artaḥshasta king of Persia as Aḥashverosh. king of Persia]” (Ezra 6:14).
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces” (Esther 1:1). Hu [appears] five [times] for evil, and five for good. Five for evil: “He [hu] was a mighty hunter”4Nimrod. (Genesis 10:9); “he is [hu] Esau, father of Edom” (Genesis 36:43); “this is [hu] Datan and Aviram” (Numbers 26:9); “he is [hu] King Aḥaz” (II Chronicles 28:22); “that [hu] Aḥashverosh” (Esther 1:1). Five for good: “Abram, he is [hu] Abraham” (I Chronicles 1:27); “that [hu] Aaron and Moses…that [hu] Moses and Aaron” (Exodus 6:26–27); “David was [hu] the youngest” (I Samuel 17:14); “he [hu], Yeḥizhiyahu” (II Chronicles 32:30); “he [hu], Ezra, came up from Babylon” (Ezra 7:6). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of the Rabbis from there: We have one that is better than all of them: “He is [hu] the Lord our God; His judgments are throughout the land” (Psalms 105:7), whose attribute of mercy is forever.
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh…” Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis, Rabbi Levi said: Aḥashverosh is Artaḥshasta. The Rabbis say: [He was called] Aḥashverosh, since anyone who remembers him, his head hurts [ḥoshesh et rosho]. Why did Scripture call him Artaḥshasta? It is because he would anger [martiaḥ] and exhaust [vetash] [others]. Aḥashverosh – Rabbi Yitzḥak and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “Aḥashverosh” – as all the troubles came during his days, as it is stated: “there was great mourning among the Jews” (Esther 4:3). “That is Aḥashverosh” – as all the good came during his days, as it is stated: “Joy and gladness for the Jews, a banquet and a holiday” (Esther 8:17). The Rabbis say: “Aḥashverosh” – before Esther came before him; “that is Aḥashverosh” – after Esther came before him, he would no longer copulate with menstruants.
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.”  “Who reigned” – but had not yet reigned.5This is obscure. Perhaps it means that he had not been an heir to the throne. “From India [Hodu] to Kush” – but isn’t it a short distance from Hodu to Kush?6It is unclear what places the Rabbis identified as Hodu and Kush. The Babylonian Talmud (Megila 11a) records two opinions: one that they are at opposite ends of the earth (consistent with their identification with India and Ethiopia) and the other that they were adjacent to one another, as is implied here. Rather, just as he reigned from Hodu to Kush, so he reigned over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces. On a similar note: “For he [Solomon] ruled over the entire region beyond the river, from Tifsaḥ to Gaza” (I Kings 5:4), but isn’t it a short distance from Tifsaḥ to Gaza? Rather, just as he reigned from Tifsaḥ to Gaza, so he reigned from one end of the world to the other end. Similarly, “From your palace to Jerusalem, kings bring gifts to You”7The literal reading of the verse is “From Your Temple above Jerusalem, to You will kings bring gifts.” The midrash is reading the verse to mean that the kings will bring gifts from the king’s palace to the Temple in Jerusalem. (Psalms 68:30) –  is it not but a short distance from your palace [i.e. the king’s palace] to [the Temple in] Jerusalem? Rather, just as it is commonplace that the sacrificial offerings [go] from the palace to [the Temple in] Jerusalem, so too, processions with gifts are destined to be commonplace for the messianic king. That is what is written: “All kings will prostrate themselves before him” (Psalms 72:11). Rabbi Kohen, brother of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, said: Just as the Divine Presence is found between the Temple and Jerusalem, so will the Divine Presence fill the world from one end to the other end. That is what is written: “May the whole earth be filled with His glory, amen and amen” (Psalms 72:19).
“…who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.” Rabbi Eliezer in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: Are there not two hundred and fifty-two provinces in the world? David ruled over them all; that is what is written: “David’s renown went out to all the lands” (I Chronicles 14:17). Solomon ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms...” (I Kings 5:1). Aḥav ruled over them all; that is what is written: “As the Lord your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom [to where my lord did not send to seek you]” (I Kings 18:10). Does a person take an oath about a place that he does not rule? Additionally, from here: “He counted the young princes of the dominions, and they were two hundred and thirty-two…” (I Kings 20:15). Where were the rest?8Earlier it was said that there were two hundred and fifty-two provinces, and here there are representatives of only two hundred and thirty-two dominions. Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis: Rabbi Levi said: They ceased to exist in the famine during the days of Eliyahu. The Rabbis said that Ben Haddad came and took them. That is what is written: “Ben Haddad king of Aram gathered his entire army, and thirty-two kings were with him, and horses and chariots; he went and besieged Samaria, and waged war against it” (I Kings 20:1). We need twenty, and you say thirty-two? Rather, there were provinces that were intractable, and he would take two [young princes] from them as hostages in his charge.Rabbi Berekhya and the Rabbis [related to the verse: “He pierced my kidneys with the contents of his quiver [benei ashpato]” (Lamentations 3:13)].  Rabbi Berekhya said: These were the captives [benei ukaifi] and the hostages [benei emuryai].9These were the “contents of his quiver,” with which God pierced Israel’s kidneys. The Rabbis said: Benei ukaifi – as they were subjugated with manacles [arkof], and benei emuryai – as they were substitutes [temurot] for their fathers. And so it says: “And the hostages [benei hataaruvot]” (II Kings 14:14), they were guarantees [me’uravot] for their fathers.Nebuchadnezzar ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Everywhere the sons of man, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the heavens dwell, [He has given into your hand and set your rule over them all]” (Daniel 2:38). Cyrus ruled over them all; that is what is written: “The Lord…has given me all the kingdoms of the earth” (Ezra 1:2). Darius ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, [the nations, and the [speakers of different] languages that reside in the entire earth]” (Daniel 6:26). Aḥashverosh ruled over half of them. Why over half of them? Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa and the Rabbis, Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: You divided my kingdom, as you said: “He is the God, who is in Jerusalem” (Ezra 1:3); by your life, I am going to divide your kingdom. The Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: You split My house, as you said: “Its height shall be sixty cubits10The height of the Sanctuary in Solomon’s Temple was one hundred and twenty cubits. and its width sixty cubits” (Ezra 6:3); by your life, I am going to split your kingdom. Let it say one hundred and twenty-six, for what reason does the verse state “one hundred and twenty-seven provinces”? Rather, this is what the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him: You added one ascent [aliya]11Aliya means both second floor and ascent. to My house from your own, as you said: “Any among you from His entire people, may his God be with him, and he may ascend” (Ezra 1:3); I, too, will provide you with an additional ascent from my own, so he added one province to the tally; that is what is written: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces.”
Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is written: “The hair of His head like pure wool” (Daniel 7:9); that He has no debt to any creature. Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Ayevu: It is written: “I have trodden a winepress alone and from the peoples there was no man with Me...” (Isaiah 63:3). Does the Holy One blessed be He need the help of the nations, that He said: “And from the peoples there was no man with Me?” Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He said: When I examine the ledgers of the nations of the world and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, “I trod on them in My wrath and I trampled them in My fury” (Isaiah 63:3). Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥilkiyya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: It is written: “It shall be on that day that I will seek to destroy all the nations [that come against Jerusalem]” (Zechariah 12:9). Will seek? Is there anyone preventing Him? Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He is saying: When I examine the ledgers of the nations of the world and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, I will seek to destroy all the nations. Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: It is written: “Vengeance and recompense are Mine at the time that their foot will falter” (Deuteronomy 32:35). Is it heroism for a person to say that when the enemies of Israel12“Enemies of Israel” refers to Israel. Rabbinic custom was to substitute “enemies of Israel” for Israel when referring to Israel’s evil deeds or the consequences thereof. falter, I will punish them? Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He said: When they cease fulfilling the mitzvot that are customary13Hebrew regilot, a play on regel, foot, in the verse. among them, and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, “vengeance and recompense are Mine.” Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Levi, the three of them said one verse: “Your hand will find all Your enemies; Your right hand will find [timtza] Your foes” (Psalms 21:9). Your hand will be present [metzuya] to repay Your enemies, You will present [tamtze] the attribute of justice to them, You will present [tamtze] them with how few are the good deeds they performed; therefore, it says: “Your hand will find all Your enemies.”
Another matter: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces” – Rabbi Yuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yuda said: He conquered seven that were as difficult as twenty; he conquered twenty that were as difficult as one hundred. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He took troops from seven and conquered twenty; he took troops from twenty and conquered one hundred. How did he conquer them? Rabbi Yuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yuda said: Like a semi-circle, you conquer the outer areas and the inner areas become conquered by themselves. Rabbi Pinḥas said: The world is circular. Rabbi Avun said: It is like the surface of a two-kav vessel.14A kav is measure of volume. A two-kav vessel contains slightly less than three liters. Rabbi Neḥemya said: It is like an aqueduct; you conquer the outsides and the insides are conquered by themselves.
Rabbi Akiva was sitting and lecturing and his students [began] dozing. He sought to rouse them; he said: Why did Esther merit to rule over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces? Rather, so said the Holy One blessed be He: Let Esther, the daughter of Sarah, who lived one hundred and twenty-seven years, come and rule over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces. Rabbi Levi said: Everywhere that it says field, it is a town [ir]; a town, a city [medina]; a city, a province. From where is a field a town? As it is stated: “Go to Anatot, to your fields” (I Kings 2:26); from where is a town [ir], a city? As it is stated: “Pass through the midst of the town [ir], through the midst of Jerusalem” (Ezekiel 9:4). A city [medina], a province, as it is stated: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces [medina].”

 “In those days, when King Aḥashverosh was sitting on his royal throne that was in the Shushan citadel” (Esther 1:2). This is one of the places15The reference to  “places” is unclear. It perhaps refers to places in Scripture. Alternatively, it could mean non-specifically, “one of the times.” that the ministering angels were passing notes before the Holy One blessed be He, saying before Him: Master of the universe, the Temple is in ruins and this wicked man is sitting and making drinking parties. He said to them: Set days against days; that is what is written: “In those days I saw in Judah some treading winepresses on Shabbat...” (Nehemiah 13:15). Rabbi Ḥelbo said: Alas, those were days of woe. Rabbi Bevai said: “Those [hahem] days” – ha (an expression of woe) for those days. That is what you say: “Wail, woe for the day” (Ezekiel 30:2). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Lamentations for those days. That is what you say: “A lamentation will be lamented” (Micha 2:4).
“When King [Aḥashverosh] was sitting [keshevet hamelekh].” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The nations of the world do not sit securely. They objected: Is it not written: “When King [Aḥashverosh] was sitting”? He said to them: Beshevet hamelekh [while the king was sitting] is not written here, rather, keshevet hamelekh [as if the king were sitting] – sitting that is not sitting. However, the sitting of Israel is sitting, as it is stated: “When Israel sat [beshevet] in Ḥeshbon and its environs” (Judges 11:26).
“On his royal throne” – Rabbi Kohen in the name of Rabbi Azarya: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav]. He sought to sit on Solomon’s throne but they did not allow him to do so. They said to him: Any king who is not ruler of the world may not sit on it. He arose and made a throne of his own, in his image. That is what is written: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav].16The defective spelling symbolizes the incompleteness of his reign.What throne was it? “The king [Solomon] made a great throne of ivory” (I Kings 10:18; II Chronicles 9:17). Rabbi Aḥa said: But isn’t it written: “Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria” (II Kings 10:1). Rabbi Hoshaya said: Just as he had seventy sons in Samaria, so he had seventy sons in Yizre’el. Each and every one had two palaces, one for the winter and one for the summer. That is what is written: “I will strike the winter house with the summer house” (Amos 3:15). Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said: Four, as it is stated: “And the ivory houses will be demolished” (ibid.). The Rabbis said: Six, as it is stated: “And many houses will be destroyed – the utterance of the Lord” (ibid.). And here it says: “A great throne of ivory”? (I Kings 10:18; II Chronicles 9:17).Rabbi Hoshaya the Great said: It was made according to the specifications of the chariot of the One who spoke and the world came into existence, the Holy One blessed be He. And so it says: “There were six stairs to the throne” (I Kings 10:19; II Chronicles 9:18) – six stairs corresponding to six heavens. But aren’t there seven? Rabbi Avun said: That where the King resides is separate. Six [stairs] corresponding to six lands [i.e., types of lands]: Land, Ground, Earth, Valley, Desert, Desolation, and World,17World is the seventh ‘land,’ and is the place from which God judges the others. and it is written: “He will judge the world in righteousness, He will administer fair judgment to the nations” (Psalms 9:9). Six corresponding to the six orders of the Mishna: Zera’im – Seeds; Moed – Appointed times; Nashim – Women; Nezikin  – Damages; Kodashim  – Consecrations; Teharot – Purities.Six, corresponding to the six days of Creation.Six corresponding to the six matriarchs: Sarah, Rebecca, Leah, Rachel, Bilha, Zilpa.Rav Huna said: Six corresponding to the six mitzvot about which the king is cautioned and commanded, as it is written: “He shall not amass wives for himself” (Deuteronomy 17:17); “he shall not amass horses for himself” (Deuteronomy 17:16); “and silver and gold, he shall not amass greatly” (Deuteronomy 17:17); “You shall not distort judgment, you shall not give preference, and you shall not take a bribe” (Deuteronomy 16:19).When he [Solomon] ascended the first step, the herald would proclaim and say to him: “He shall not amass wives for himself.” On the second, he would proclaim: “He shall not amass horses for himself.” On the third, he would proclaim: “And silver and gold, he shall not amass.” On the fourth, “you shall not distort judgment.” On the fifth, “you shall not give preference.” On the sixth, “you shall not take a bribe.” And so it says [about the throne which was on the sixth step]: “There were arm rests on this side and that side of the place of the seat” (I Kings 10:19). When he came to sit, he [the herald] would say to him: Know before whom you sit, before the He who spoke and the world came into existence.They said: Once Solomon died, Shishak, king of Egypt, came and took it [the throne] from them. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Shishak is Pharaoh, and why is he called by the name Shishak? Because he came against Israel with enthusiasm [bishkikut] and said: I am taking it in payment for my daughter’s marriage contract. He waged war with Zeraḥ the Kushite and he took it from him. Asa waged war with Zeraḥ the Kushite who fell by his hand and he took it from him. It was taught: Asa and all the kings of Judah sat upon it. When Nebuchadnezzar came up and destroyed Jerusalem, he exiled it to Babylon, and from Babylon to Media, from Media to Greece, and from Greece to Edom [Rome]. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei said: I saw its fragments in Rome. Nebuchadnezzar sat upon it, Cyrus sat upon it, Aḥashverosh sought to sit upon it but they did not allow him to do so. They said to him: Any king who has not become ruler of the world may not sit on it. He arose and made one of his own like it; that is what is written: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav].” “And there was a round top to the throne, at its back” (I Kings 10:19) –  Rabbi Aḥa said: Like this round headrest of an armchair. “There were arm rests on this side and that side of the place of the seat” (ibid.). He ascends the first step, and the lion extends its foreleg to him. On the second, the eagle extends its leg to him. “Of the place of the seat,” this is how they greeted him, and at the place of the seat, there was a golden scepter behind it, and a dove was set in its top with a golden crown in its mouth, so that the king would be sitting on the seat with a golden crown [suspended just above him], touching but not touching.
Rabbi Ayevu said: It is written: “For dominion belongs to the Lord; He rules over nations” (Psalms 22:29), yet you say, “when King Aḥashverosh was sitting on his royal throne”?18Isn’t it actually God’s royal throne? Rather, in the past, there was royal sovereignty in Israel. When they sinned, sovereignty was taken from them and given to the nations of the world; that is what is written: “I will sell the land into the hands of the wicked” (Ezekiel 30:12). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Into the hands of evil stewards; tomorrow, when Israel repents, the Holy One blessed be He will take it from the idolaters and returns it to Israel. When? “Saviors will ascend Mount Zion” (Ovadya 1:21).
“That was in  the Shushan citadel” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥananel: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: Cyrus referred to the name of His city and the name of His province,19The name of God’s city and God’s province.as he said: “In Jerusalem, which is in Judah” (Ezra 1:2); I, too, will refer to the name of your city and the name of your province, as it is stated: “That was in the Shushan citadel which is in the province of Elam” (Daniel 8:2).
“In the third year of his reign, he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants, the elite of Persia and Media, the nobles and governors of the provinces before him” (Esther 1:3).Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yehuda said: In the third year of the crafting of the throne. Once he completed the crafting of the throne, “he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.” Rabbi Neḥemya said: In the third year of the cancellation of the construction of the Temple; once three years since the cancellation of the construction of the Temple were completed, “he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Eimi said: There were four good attributes in that man: He went three years without a crown and without a throne; he waited four years until he found a wife appropriate for him; and he would not do anything without consulting. Rabbi Pinḥas said: And anyone who did him a favor, he would record it; that is what is written: “It was found written that Mordekhai had told...” (Esther 6:2).
“He made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.”  Antoninus made a feast for Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, who said to him: Perhaps you have not fulfilled your obligation to the lamplighters? He said to him: Of what significance are they to me? He said to him: Perhaps they will put murky oil in the lamps and ruin the feast. He said to him: From where do you know this? He said to him: From Aḥashverosh, about whom it is written: “He made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.”
“The elite of Persia and Media:” It is taught in the name of Rabbi Natan about these ten measures: There are ten portions of licentiousness in the world, nine in Alexandria and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of wealth in the world, nine in Rome and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of poverty in the world, nine in Lydia20‘Lydia’ refers to the district in Asia Minor. Alternatively, this could be Lod, the town in Judea. and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of sorcery in the world, nine in Egypt and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of foolishness in the world, nine among the Ishmaelites and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of vigor in the world, nine among the Ishmaelites and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of lice in the world, nine among the Persians and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of attractiveness in the world, nine in Media and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of ugliness in the world, nine in the East and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of power in the world, nine among the Chaldeans and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of courage in the world, nine in Judah and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of beauty in the world, nine in Jerusalem and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of wisdom in the world, nine in the Land of Israel and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of Torah in the world, nine in the Land of Israel and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of hypocrisy in the world, nine in Jerusalem and one in the rest of the world; that is what is written: “…for from the prophets of Jerusalem hypocrisy has gone out to all the land” (Jeremiah 23:15).
Another matter: “The elite of Persia and Media” – sometimes Media precedes Persia and sometimes Persia precedes Media. When the throne is in Media, Persia is secondary to it; when the throne is in Persia, Media is secondary to it. [Regarding] Persia, why do they call it Persia [Paras]? Because it received hegemony in pieces [perusot] [non-consecutively], once in the days of Terada, once in the days of Adarkian, and once in the future; that is what is written: “This shall be peace: When Assyria will come into our land and when it will tread in our palaces...”21The midrash understands Assyria in the verse to refer to Persia.  (Micah 5:4). [Regarding] Media, why do they call it Media [Madai]? Because they acknowledge [modaya] the Holy One blessed be He. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: The kings of Media were upright, and the Holy One blessed be He has nothing against them other than the idolatry that was bequeathed to them by their ancestors.
The nobles – Rabbi Elazar said: The nobles are the king’s two legions, as the king is not called Augustus (i.e. emperor) until they call him that first, and these are they. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The Decumanians and the Augustans [legions].22These are clearly Latin terms and presumably based on Roman units that were close to the emperor. Some have suggested that these are the Praetorian Guards, transplanted here to a Babylonian/Persian context. It was they who counseled Nebuchadnezzar and he went up and destroyed the Temple. The Holy One blessed be He destroyed them utterly and established others in their stead, and these were they. Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: They were the capable and the literate; Rav Huna said: Those possessing reason and their deputies; Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Those possessing reason were his counselors; that is what you say: “Then Daniel responded with counsel and discretion” (Daniel 2:14).
“And governors of the provinces before him.” Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Rabbi Elazar said: Like the court in Geder, where the king sits in judgment above, and all the people sit before him on the ground. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Like the great basilica filled with people, with the king sitting on his couch and all the people prostrated before him; that is why it says: “And governors of the provinces before him.”

Section: Sifrei_Numbers
 (Bamidbar 5:1-2) "And the L-rd spoke to Moses, saying: Command the children of Israel that they send out of the camp every leper (metzora) and everyone with a (genital discharge (zav), and everyone that is unclean by (contact with) a body (tamei meth)." Why was this section stated? (For) from (Bamidbar 19:20) "A man, if he becomes unclean and does not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the congregation, for he has defiled the sanctuary of the L-rd," we hear the punishment; but we have not heard the exhortation. It is, therefore, written "Command the children of Israel that they send out of the camp … (3) and they shall not make unclean their camps in which I dwell." This (3) is the exhortation that the unclean not enter the sanctuary in a state of uncleanliness.
 "Command": The command is immediately, for present performance and for future generations. You say thus, but perhaps it is only for future performance! It is, therefore, (to negate this) written "Command the children of Israel that they send … (Bamidbar 19:4) "And the children of Israel did so, sending them outside the camp" — whence we derive that the command is for immediate performance. And whence do we derive that it is (also) for future generations? From (Vayikra 24:2) "Command the children of Israel that they take to you clear olive oil … (3) … an eternal statute for your generations." — But how do we derive (the same) for all the commands in the Torah? R. Yishmael says: Since we find unqualified commands in the Torah, and one of them was qualified as being for present performance and for future generations, we derive the same for all the mitzvoth in the Torah. R. Yehudah b. Bethira says: "command" in all places connotes impulsion (to the act), as it is written (Devarim 3:28) "And command Joshua and strengthen him and fortify him" — whence we learn "We strengthen only the (internally) strengthened," and "We impel only the (internally) impelled." R. Shimon b. Yochai says: "Command" in all places entails expense, as it is written (Vayikra 24:2) "Command the children of Israel that they take to you pure olive oil," (Bamidbar 35:2) "Command the children of Israel that they give to the Levites from the inheritance, etc." (Bamidbar 28:2) "Command the children of Israel and say to them: My offering, My bread, for My fires" — whence we see that "command" in all places entails expense. Except in one; and which is that? (Bamidbar 34:2) "Command the children of Israel and say to them: When you come to the land of Canaan, etc." — where the intent is: Impel them to the division of the land. Rebbi says: "Command" in all places is exhortation, as it is written (Bereshit 2:16-17) "And the L-rd G-d commanded (i.e., exhorted) the man, saying … but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat."
 (Bamidbar 5:2) "that they send out of the camp": I understand this to mean from the Levite camp alone. Whence do I derive that the Israelite camp is also meant? From (Bamidbar 5:3) "Outside the camp shall you send them." (Bamidbar 5:3) "and they shall not make unclean their camps in whose midst I dwell": This is the camp of the Shechinah. — But even if this were not mentioned, I could derive it a fortiori, viz. If those with dead-body tumah are ejected from the less stringent camp, that of the Israelites, how much more so are they ejected from the more stringent camp, that of the Shechinah. If so, why is "and they shall not make unclean their camps" needed? To teach that we do not punish by an a fortiori argument. R. Yehudah says: There is no need (for the verse to teach that they are sent out of the camp of the Shechinah), for it follows a fortiori, viz.: If those with (dead-body) tumah are ejected from the less stringent camp, (that of) the ark (i.e., the camp of the Levites), how much more so are they ejected from the more stringent camp, (that of) the Shechinah, (R. Yehudah obviously holding that we do punish by an a fortiori argument). If so, why is it written "and they shall not make unclean their camps?" Because from "they shall send out from the camp every leper and every zav and every tamei meth," I would understand that they are all sent to one place; it is, therefore, written in respect to a leper (Vayikra 13:46) "Solitary shall he sit" — that no other unclean ones sit with him. I might then think that zavim and the tamei meth are sent to one camp; it is, therefore, written "and they shall not make unclean their camps" — to assign a separate camp for each. These are the words of R. Yehudah. Rebbi says: There is no need (for the above). A leper was included in the general category (of the unclean), and left the category (for special mention) to teach concerning the category, viz.: Just as a leper, whose tumah is most stringent — his sending is more stringent than that of his neighbor, so, each one whose tumah is more stringent, his sending is more stringent than that of his neighbor.
 This is the source for the sages' gradations of partitions (mechitzoth). Wherever zav confers tumah, metzora (leper) confers tumah. metzora is of greater stringency (than zav) in that it confers tumah upon one who enters (a house afflicted with tzara'ath [viz. Vayikra 14:46] [— wherefore a metzora is sent out of all three camps]). Wherever tamei meth confers tumah, zav confers tumah. zav is of greater stringency (than tamei meth) in that it confers tumah under an even mesama (a stone beneath which there is a cavity [viz. Vayikra 15:9] [— wherefore a zav is sent out of two camps]). Wherever tvul yom (one who has immersed in the daytime [pending purification in the evening]) confers tumah, tamei meth confers tumah. tamei meth is of greater stringency (than tvul yom) in that it confers tumah upon a man (who touches him, viz. [Bamidbar 19:22] [— wherefore a tamei meth is sent out of one camp]). Wherever one's lacking atonement (through an offering) renders (him) unfit (for eating consecrated food) tvul yom renders (him) unfit. tvul yom is of greater stringency (than one's lacking atonement) in that he renders terumah unfit.
 "that they send out of the camp": Is this speaking of all men or only the Levites, the carriers of the ark? It is, therefore, written (Ibid. 3) "From male until female shall you send out" — Scripture speaks of all men. R. Yoshiyah says "that they send out of the camp" connotes both adults and minors. You say both adults and minors, but perhaps the criterion (for inclusion) should be punishment, viz.: Just as we find re sanctuary defilement that only adults are punished, viz. (Ibid. 19:20) "And a man, if he becomes unclean and does not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off" — here, too, only adults are intended. It is, therefore, written "From male until female shall you send out," both adults and minors. R. Yochanan says: Why is it written "From male until female shall you send out"? Because it is written "They shall send out of the camp," I might think, only these (viz. (Ibid. 2). Whence do I derive (the same for) all the other types of tumah? From "From male until female — any (type of tumah) that affects male or female — shall you send out." This tells me only of male and female. Whence do we derive the same for one whose sex is unknown or a hermaphrodite? From (the redundant) "Outside the camp shall you send them." This tells me only of one who can be sent away (i.e., of one who can walk). Whence do I derive (the same for) one who cannot be sent away (i.e., that he must be taken by another)? From "Outside the camp shall you send them." This tells me only of men. Whence do I derive (the same for) appurtenances (that have become tamei)? From "and they shall not make unclean their camps." R. Akiva says: "Outside of the camp shall you send them" connotes both men and appurtenances. R. Yishmael says: It is derived by induction, viz.: A man is subject to plague tumah and garments are subject to plague tumah. Just as a man is subject to being sent away, so, appurtenances. — No, this may be so for a man, who imparts tumah (to an object) by reclining (mishkav) or sitting (moshav [upon it]), for which reason he must be sent away — as opposed to appurtenances, which do not impart tumah in that manner! — No, this is refuted by (the instance of) stones from a leprous house, which, though they do not impart tumah through mishkav or moshav, require being sent away. Do not wonder, then, if appurtenances, though they do not impart tumah through mishkav and moshav are to be sent away. R. Yossi Haglili says "From male until female shall you send them out": Just as male and female are distinctive in being subject to becoming proto-tumah (av hatumah) require being sent away, so, all that are thus susceptible — to exclude earthenware vessels, which are not thus susceptible.
 (Vayikra 17:15) "and every soul that eats neveilah (carcass) or treifah (what is "torn") … he shall wash his clothes and bathe in water …" R. Yitzchak says: It is written (Ibid. 16) "And if he does not wash (his clothes) and he does not bathe his flesh (and he eats kodshim or enters the sanctuary), he shall bear his sin." For not bathing his body Scripture makes him liable to kareth ("cutting-off'). You say, it is for not bathing his body, but perhaps it is for not washing his clothes! — Can you say this? If for the more stringent tumath meth he is not punished (with kareth) for not washing his clothes, how much more so is he not punished for not washing his clothes for the less stringent eating of carcass! If so, what is the intent of "And if he does not wash his clothes"? To serve as an exhortation (against not washing them).
 "Outside of the camp shall you send them": What is the intent of this (after "They shall send out of the camp")? From "They shall send out of the camp," I might think the intent is (only) that they not touch the ark or its bearers, but they should be assigned a place for themselves (inside the camp). It is, therefore, written "Outside of the camp shall you send them": "and they shall not make unclean their camps" — whence (i.e., from the three-fold repetition of "camp") they stated: There were three camps: the Israelite camp, the Levite camp, and the camp of the Shechinah. From the entrance to Jerusalem until the Temple mount — the Israelite camp. From the entrance to the Temple mount until the azarah (the Temple courtyard) — the Levite camp. From the entrance to the azarah and inwards — the camp of the Shechinah. (Ibid. 3) "in whose midst I dwell": Beloved are Israel, who, even when they are tamei, the Shechinah is among them, as it is written (Vayikra 16:16) "who dwells with them in the midst of their uncleanliness," and (Bamidbar) 35:34) "And you shall not defile the land which you inhabit, in which I dwell, for I, the L-rd, dwell in the midst of the children of Israel (even when they are unclean)."
 (Ibid. 5:4) "And the children of Israel did so, and they sent them outside the camp": R. Yossi Haglili says: Come and see how great is the power of transgression. For before they stretched forth their hands to transgress (with the golden calf), there were no zavim or lepers among them, and after they did so, there were zavim and lepers among them. In the course (of our learning) we learned that these three things (zavim, lepers, and tamei meth) occurred on the same day (the day that they made the golden calf). R. Shimon b. Yochai says: Come and see how great is the power of transgression. For before they stretched forth their hands to transgress, what is written of them? (Shemot 24:17) "and the sight of the glory of the L-rd was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain in the eyes of the children of Israel" — They did not fear and they did not tremble. After they stretched forth their hands to transgress, what is written of them? (Ibid. 34:30) "And Aaron and all of Israel saw Moses, and, behold, the skin of his face shone, and they were afraid to approach him." "And the children of Israel did so": This is to declare the praise of Israel, that just as Moses told them, thus did they do. What is the intent of (the additional) "As the L-rd spoke to Moses, so did the children of Israel do"? To teach that the unclean ones themselves, (who were sent out), did not protest.

Section: Sifrei_Deuteronomy
(Devarim 1:1) "These are the words which Moses spoke, etc.": Now did Moses prophesy only these? Did he not write the entire Torah, viz. (Ibid. 31:9) "And Moses wrote this Torah"? What, then, is the intent of "These are the words"? We are hereby taught that they were words of rebuke, viz. (Ibid. 32:15) "And Yeshurun grew fat and it kicked, etc."
Similarly, (Amos 3:1) "Hear this prophecy which the L-rd spoke, etc." Now did Amos prophesy only these? Is it not written (Amos 1:1) "The words of Amos, one of the herders of Tekoa, who saw visions concerning Israel"? The intent (of "this prophecy") is that they were words of rebuke, viz. (Ibid. 4;1) "Hear this thing, you cows of Bashan on Mount Shomron, etc." The "cows of Bashan" are their (corrupt) judges.
Similarly, (Jeremiah 7:1) "The word that came to Jeremiah, etc.", (Ibid. 40:4) "And these are the words that the L-rd spoke, etc." Now did Jeremiah prophesy only these? Did he not write the entire book, viz. (Ibid. 51:64) "Until here, the words of Jeremiah"? What, then, is the intent of "And these are the words"? We are hereby taught that they were words of rebuke, viz. (Ibid. 30:5-7) "A sound of terror have we heard, of fear and not peace. Ask now and see if a male has ever given birth. Why, then, do I see that every man puts his hands upon his loins like a woman in childbirth, and all faces turn pale? Woe! For that day is great. There is none like it. It is a time of trouble for Jacob. But from it he will be saved."
Similarly, (II Samuel 23:1) "And these are the last words of David': Now did he prophesy only these alone? Is it not written (Ibid. 2) "The spirit of the L-rd spoke in me and His word was on my tongue"? What, then, is the intent of "And these are the last words of David"? We are hereby taught that they were words of rebuke, viz. (Ibid. 6) "And (the men of) Belial shall as thorns be all of them cast away."
Similarly, (Koheleth 1:1) "The words of Koheleth son of David, king in Jerusalem": Now did Solomon prophesy only these alone? Did he not write three books? We are hereby taught that they were words of rebuke, viz. (Ibid. 4-7) "A generation goes and a generation comes … and the sun shines and the sun sets … It goes to the south and it turns to the north. Round and round (east and west) goes the wind … All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full." The wicked are spoken of as sun, earth, and sea, which have no reward.
(Devarim, Ibid.) "to all of Israel": If he rebuked (only) some of them, those who were not present would have contended: "This is what you heard from the son of Amram and you did not object thus and thus? Had we been there, we would have objected four or five times for every thing that he said!"
Therefore, Moses assembled all of them great and small, and said to them: Anyone who has any objection let him come and state it!"
Variantly: "to all of Israel": They all could stand up under rebuke. R. Tarfon said: I swear if (i.e., that there is not) anyone in this generation who is capable of receiving rebuke. R. Akiva said: I swear if (i.e., that there is not) anyone in this generation who is capable of giving rebuke. R. Yochanan b. Nuri said: I testify by heaven and earth that more than five times R. Akiva was rebuked on my account before R. Gamliel and I know that he loved me even more (for it), in fulfillment of (Proverbs 9:8) "Reprove not a scorner lest he hate you. Reprove a wise man and he will love you." For reproof leads to peace. And thus do you find with Abraham, viz. (Bereshith 21:25) "And Abraham reproved Avimelech because of the well, etc." And what is written (of this)? (Ibid. 28) "And the two of them made a covenant." And thus with Israel, viz. (Ibid. 26:27) "And Isaac said to them: Why did you come to me when you hate me and you sent me away from you!" And (Ibid. 31) "And they departed from him in peace."
(Devarim, Ibid.) "across the Jordan": We are hereby taught that he rebuked them for what they did across the Jordan.
"in the desert": We are hereby taught that he rebuked them for what they did in the desert. They took their small sons and daughters and threw them into Moses' lap and said to him? What provisions did you make for these? What livelihood did you provide for them? R. Yehudah says: This ("in the desert") refers to (Shemoth 16:3) "And the children of Israel said to them (Moses and Aaron): Would that we had died by the hand of the L-rd in the land of Egypt!"
Variantly: "in the desert" comprises all that they did in the desert.
"in the plain": We are hereby taught that he rebuked them for what they did in the plains of Moav, viz. (Bamidbar 25:1)
"against Suf": We are hereby taught that he rebuked them for what they did at the Red Sea (viz. Shemoth 14:11). R. Yehudah says: They rebelled in the midst of the sea, and they rebelled upon ascending from the sea, turning their backs upon Moses and traveling three journeys, viz. (Psalms 106:7) "And they rebelled at the sea, in the sea of Suf": — "at the Sea," upon ascending from it; — "in the sea," in its very midst. I might think that he rebuked them only at the beginning of a journey. Whence do I derive (that he also did so) between journey and journey? From "between Paran" and "between Tofel." "tofel and lavan (white)": They spoke vain words ("divrei tifluth" [as in "tofel"]) against the manna, saying that it was "white" (i.e. insubstantial), viz. (Bamidbar 21:5) "and our soul loathes this 'light' bread" — whereupon he said to them: "Fools, the very essence of kings is that they are fed only 'light' bread, so they not be seized with diarrhea — but you have grumbled at the good that I have given you, following the precedent of your father (Adam). I told him that I would make a helpmate for him (Bereshith 2:18), and for this good that I granted him he grumbled against Me, (Ibid. 3:12) 'The woman that You gave to me — she gave me from the tree and I ate.'"
(Devarim, Ibid.) "and Chatzeroth": He said to them: Should you not have learned from what I did to Miriam in Chatzeroth? (viz. Bamidbar 12). If I did not show favoritism in judgment to Miriam the righteous, how much more so (would I not do so) to others!
Variantly: If Miriam, who spoke only against her younger brother, was thus punished, how much more so one who speaks against another greater than he!
Variantly: If (in the instance of) Miriam, who spoke thus only in the hearing of the L-rd alone — (viz. Ibid. 12:2 - "And the L-rd heard") — was thus punished, how much more so, one who demeans his neighbor in public!
(Devarim, Ibid.) "and an abundance of gold" (an allusion to the golden calf): He said to them: This thing outweighs all that you have done. The golden calf weighs upon Me more than all! Rebbi was wont to say: An analogy: One caused his neighbor many troubles. In the end, he added an additional trouble, and the other said: This outweighs everything you have done to me. This weighs upon me more than all! Thus did the Holy One Blessed be He say to Israel: This outweighs everything that you have done! Variantly: "and an abundance of gold": R. Shimon b. Yochai says: An analogy: One received sages and disciples, and all praised him. Then Canaanites came, and he received them! — at which they said: This is the man's nature — to receive all! Thus did Moses say to Israel: (You gave) "an abundance of gold" for the mishkan (the tabernacle) — (You gave) "an abundance of gold" for the golden calf! R. B'na'ah says: Israel served idolatry, for which they are liable to extinction — Let the gold of the mishkan atone for the gold of the calf! R. Yossi berebbi Chanina says: It is written "in the desert, in the plain": This alludes to the ten trials wherewith our fathers tried the Holy One Blessed be He in the desert: two at the (Red) sea, (in the descent [Shemoth 14:11] and in the ascent [Psalms 106:7]), two, with water, (at Marah [Shemoth 15:23] and at Refidim [Shemoth 17]), two with manna, ("Let no man go out of his place" [Shemoth 17:29] and "Let no man leave of it" [Shemoth 16:19]), two with the quail, (the first [16:3] and the second [Bamidbar 11:4]), one with the golden calf (Shemoth 32), and one with the spies (Bamidbar 13). R. Yossi b. Dormaskith said to him: Yehudah berebbi, why do you distort the verses for us (by assigning allegorical interpretations to what are really place names)? I testify by heaven and earth that we have reviewed all of the sources and (we have found that) they are all place names. It is just that they were thus named (as aforementioned) because of an event (that transpired there).
Similarly, (Bereshith 26:20) "And he called the name of the well 'Esek' because they strove ('hitasku') with him." And it is written (Ibid. 33) "And he called it 'shivah,' etc."
Similarly, R. Yehudah expounded (Zechariah 9:1) "A burden (of prophecy) in the land of chadrach and Damascus is its resting place.": This ("chadrach") refers to the Messiah who will be "chad" ("sharp") to the Canaanites, and "rach" ("soft") to Israel" — whereupon R. Yossi b. Dormaskith said to him: Yehudah berebbi, why do you distort the verses for us? I testify by heaven and earth that I am from Damascus and there is a place called Chadrach there. And how do I understand "and Damascus is (its) resting place"? (As meaning) that Jerusalem is destined to extend until Damascus; "(its) resting place" is Jerusalem, as it is written (Psalms 132:19) "This (Jerusalem) is My resting place forever." R. Yehudah: How do you understand (Jeremiah 30:18) "And the city will be built on its foundation"? R. Yossi: (As meaning) that (though) Jerusalem is not destined to move from its place (i.e., from its foundation), it will expand from its sides). How do I understand (Ezekiel 91:7) "And there was an enlarging and a winding about upwards, etc."? Eretz Yisrael is destined to broaden and rise from all of her sides like a fig, which is narrow below and broad above, and the gates of Jerusalem are destined to reach until Damascus. And thus is it written (Song of Songs 7:5) "Your nose is like the tower of Levanon, which looks towards Damascus." And the exiles will come and rest therein, as it is written "and Damascus is His resting place," and (Isaiah 2:2-3) "And it will be in the end of days the mountain of the L-rd's house will be established in the top of the mountains and will be exalted above the hills, and all the nations will flow unto it. And many peoples will go and say: Come, let us go up to the house of the L-rd, to the house of the G-d of Jacob, and He will teach us of His ways and we will walk in His paths. For from Zion will go forth Torah, and the words of the L-rd from Jerusalem."
Similarly, R. Yehudah expounded (Bereshith 41:43) "And he (Pharaoh) had him ride in the chariot next to his, and they called before him "Avrech.": This is Joseph, who was a father ("av") in wisdom and young ("rach") in years — whereupon R. Yossi b. Dormaskith said to him: Yehudah berebbi, why do you distort the verses for us? I testify by heaven and earth that "avrech" signifies (bending of) the knees ("birkayim"). (Ibid.) "and he set him over all the land of Egypt": that all enter and leave by his command.

