 


I N THE NAME OF ALLAH, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. 
Praise be to Allah Whose guidance broke the darkness of 
ignorance; through His divine decree, miraculous events 
are created, and unto Him all shall return. With His 
decree, day and night became different. He creates things 
from nothing. He creates all beings and assigns them their 
allowances. He is the perfect original designer of every being; 
He neither treats things nor abandons them. Attributes are not 
sufficient to describe Him, and injustice is incompatible with 
Him. Words cannot adequately describe Him, and events 
cannot happen to Him. May Allah grant salvation to the Master 
of Messengers and the Seal of all Prophets to whom the Book 
(the Qur'an) was revealed in the unequivocal Arabic language. 
May Allah also grant His last Prophet, who has been recorded 
in the ancient Psalms, and His pure and righteous family 
salvation. May peace be upon him until the day of judgment. 

For those who are inspired to delve into the science of 
philosophers in order to look for their secrets and search for 
their miracles, I would like to say that my motive in writing this 
book, which I titled The Goal of The Wise, is what I came across 
when I wrote the previous book titled The Rank of The Wise. I 
started writing this book in the year 343 when I finished editing 
The Rank of The Wise, and I completed it in 348. I was 


1 



^{Picatrix}> 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


encouraged to write this book by the widespread interest by our 
generation in the book in which I talked about tahsmans and the 
art of different types of magic although they were not aware of 
what they were looking for or what approach they should 
follow. They desperately tried to find what has been made off 
limits for them by the philosophers who prevented them from 
discovering it and intentionally concealed it, made it vague and 
veiled it by indecipherable symbols because of the destruction it 
entails for the world. However, Allah, Who protects His World, 
forbids that from taking place. For that purpose they erected 
temples and sculptured pictures on them as signs to knowledge 
seekers and clues to researchers. They left many books replete 
with symbols, secrets and an indecipherable scripts that can 
only be understood by philosophers like themselves. 

Accordingly, I sought to make it known and explain to the 
people the darkened path which leads to this divine conclusion 
and to point out what philosophers have concealed concerning 
this magical outcome as I endeavored to do in developing this 
result. I have divided this work into four books as I did in The 
Rank, and every book is divided into several chapters: 

The First Book consists of seven chapters because the fast 
planets are seven. The first chapter deals with the Virtue of 
Wisdom. I discuss in the first book the astrological ratios and 
the pattern of these ratios in making tahsmans and how planets 
cast their light on other orbiting planets. Additionally, I present 
in the first book the vague meanings which have been withheld 
and concealed by philosophers. 

The Second Book deals with the astrological pictures and 
their functions, and it explains the secrets which philosophers 
have concealed about these functions. This book also deals with 
the patterns of borrowing magic in the world of formation and 
dissolution as called by the philosophers of the elite. Moreover, 
it explains why Plato calls for finding these pictures. 


The Third Book is about the fortunes of the planets from the 
three generative origins, and it explains that there is nothing left 
in the world of formation and dissolution that agrees with such 
functions; reactions are impossible because of their fluidity and 
susceptibility to interaction, and consequently, nothing remains. 
I also mention their tempers in dealing with one another to 
attain the required magical function through the effect of the 
original or natural heat or both either by means of emanating 
incense or by whatever cooked food or drink that can get into 
the stomach. 

The Fourth Book talks about the magic of the Kurds, the 
Nabateans, and the Abyssinians and examples of the magical 
tricks which are considered the best type of magic. I complete 
this purpose without withholding or concealing anything. I 
beseech Allah's assistance to help me complete this endeavor. 
He is my supporter, and with His support I hereby begin, Allah 
willing. 



2 


3 






Book I 





-^Chapter One^* 


I WOULD LIKE TO ADVISE YOU, my brother, may Allah 
enlighten your mind, that wisdom is one of the most 
virtuous talents and one of the most preferred gains. 
Wisdom is the knowledge of sublime reasons for which 
beings exist, and the obvious reasons for things which have 
reasons for their existence. You must be certain of their 
existence and what and how they are. Although they are many, 
they ascend in order to the One Being, who caused other beings 
to be, whether they are far away or near by. 

That One is first in reality and His Being does not stem from 
any other being. He is self-sufficient and thus. His Being does 
not gain from any other being; by no means does His Being 
benefit from any other being. 

Fundamentally, He cannot be a body or in a body. His Being 
is different from all other beings and, in actuality, there is 
nothing in common, except the name only, although not in the 
concept of the name. 

He can only be One; He is One in reality, and He is the One 
Who gave all other beings their identities by which we learn to 
identify them. He is the original Truth who assigns to others 
their truth. His truth is self-sufficient and consequently. He does 
not gain from the truth of others. 


7 



-»2{Picatrix}> 


-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


It is unimaginable to think that there is more perfection than 
His: not to mention that it does not exist, a more complete truth 
than His, or more complete Oneness than His. He is All¬ 
knowing of how other beings derived their essence, their 
realities, and their identities from Him. He is also All-knowing 
of how cause-and-effect gains its characteristics. 

He is all-knowing of the ranks of all beings: some are first, 
some are middle, and some are last. The last have causes, but 
they are not causes per se for things below them. Similarly, the 
middle beings have causes before them, and they are causes for 
things under them as well. The first are the causes of what are 
under them, but they do not have causes above them. He is All¬ 
knowing of how the last ascend in rank until they reach the first, 
and how the order is managed at first and accepted by all 
beings in their ascending order until they reach the last. 

This is wisdom in reality, my student; so what do you think 
of the one whose approach is this? Wisdom, may Allah bless 
you, is broad and noble, and seeking it is an obligation, as well 
as a virtue. It enlightens the mind and the soul with an 
everlasting and splendid light as they seek it and understand it 
and pay little attention to this mortal world. Wisdom will 
motivate the mind and soul to ascend from the world from 
which they were originated to the higher distinguished world 
where they shall grow and settle so that Allah may advise them 
of the cause-and-effect of the world and the reason for relating 
the cause to its effect. Allah is in their midst so that they may 
certainly know that He is the cause of the world, and the world 
is His effect, and the reason for this effect is worshipping Him 
and recognizing His existence. He said, "I have only created 
djinn and men, so that they may serve Me," 2 that is to know Me. 
He will protect them and provide them with material 
subsistence so that they may thank Him and praise Him. He can 


2 Sura 51, verse 56 


bring about misery, as well as happiness to whomever He wills, 
and He can keep whomever He wills in His ever-lasting Grace. 

Wisdom has three subjective characteristics: it grows and 
never vanishes, it chastises and disciplines, and it will not 
approach anyone who is not interested in it. 

You may know that this conclusion, which I am about to 
disclose, would not have existed without Wisdom. It has been 
rightly called conclusion by the wise. To people specialized in 
logic, a conclusion is the fruit of analogy as mentioned in the 
introductions. The only purpose for presenting these two 
conclusions is to motivate you to seek knowledge. Knowledge 
can only be obtained by the wise who are well versed in all arts 
of wisdom: some of these arts are religious such as the science 
of revelation, the science of asceticism and the science of fiqh 3 , 
some are natural such as the celestial, the world, the universe 
and evil, some are theological such as the knowledge of the self 
and the Creator, and some are logical and analytical. 
Accordingly, the rank of these two conclusions on the scale of 
wisdom is similar to the rank of deduction on the scale of 
analogy. This is the best of what has been presented in the 
introductions. I hereby have disclosed to you a miraculous 
secret. This is to let you know that the outcome is the fruit of the 
two introductions, which is called the indicia. If the outcome is 
productive, it is called accumulative, whereas the Greeks call it 
'syllogismus.' 4 

The introduction is composed of a theme and some 
information related to the theme; the theme is the subject in the 
philologist's discipline, and the information related to the 
subject is the predicate. This information may be true or false. It 
is certain that the introduction or the related information are not 
defined because what is stated in the predicate is taken or 


•l 

Arabic-jurisprudence in Islam 

4 Greek-computation.-Z,j£We// & Scott’s Greek-English Lexicon 


8 


9 



^Picatrix}^ 


drawn from the subject, although some of it could be defined 
and some could be drawn. Thus, the information is neither 
limited or drawn, although some of it could be limited and 
some could be drawn. Informational statements are usually 
used in most cases. Most of the other styles of speech are not 
used by philosophers such as the imperative, informative, 
interrogative and vocative styles because they do not bear 
truthfulness or falsehood. What we have presented needs a long 
explanation, that is beyond the scope of this book. Whoever 
likes to get further information about this topic, may consult 
relevant sources. 




^{Chapter Two^ 


Y OU MAY KNOW that this conclusion is what is 
termed as magic. Magic is, in fact, everything that 
absolutely fascinates minds and attract souls by means 
of words and deeds. This fascination and attraction are 
demonstrated by exclamation, following, listening and 
approval. They are difficult for the mind to perceive, and their 
causes are veiled from the simpleton. That is because it is a 
divine force associated with advanced reasons for the purpose 
of understanding it. What I am working on is a vague 
discipline. Its subject is a spirit within a spirit, that includes 
analysis and imagination. A talisman is a spirit within a body, 
while chemistry is a body within a body. In summary, the 
causes of magic are beyond the understanding of the majority 
and it is difficult to invent. 

The fact about a talisman is that its name is reversed (The 
letters of the word talisman in Arabic are 'talsam' and when this 
combination is reversed, it becomes 'maslat' which means 
domination, control); it is domination because its essence is 
coercion and control. It functions according to the purpose it 
was composed for: overpowering and coercing, by using 
numerical ratios and placing astrological secrets in certain 
bodies at appropriate times and by using incenses that are 
powerful and capable of bringing out the spirit of that talisman. 


10 


11 


-»S{Picatrix}> 


-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


This situation is similar to that of the second result, termed 
elixir, which transforms a body to itself by coercion. It is an 
interacting yeast that changes things from their essence; it is like 
poison that travels in similar bodies and consequently, changes 
them to its nature in order to transform a person to another by a 
force placed within itself. You may know, brother, that a 
talisman, to philosophers, is like yeast, which is an elixir 
composed of earth, air, water and fire, the composition of which 
is transformed through interaction to its condition and is 
reversed to its image. Another example is Alchemy, which does 
the same thing; it quickly transforms the body to itself and 
changes it from one state to another of a higher quality; a new 
form, new characteristics, more solid and clear of corrosion and 
impurity. That is how the forbearers understood it. 

The term elixir means the coercing force of the forces acting 
on it and compelling it to be transformed into its essence and 
thus become similar to it. An elixir can only be some sort of a 
combination of animals, plants and metals. To them this 
combination makes up the world and with this combination the 
world is made up and administered; plants can not survive on 
their own as well as animals which need the plants for their 
survival. Similarly metals need fire for melting and forming in 
the presence of mercurial humidity. This is what I have 
overlooked in The Rank Book. I would like to go back to our 
topic to state that: magic is limited to two branches: theoretical 
and practical. The science of magic deals with knowing the 
positions of fixed planets, the location of their pictures, the 
manner by which they cast their light on orbiting planets and 
the astrological ratios. These are the elements to be known in 
order to achieve what you are looking for. Under the science of 
magic, all options and talismans were dealt with and discussed 
by our forbearers. You may know that he who chooses to do 
this, will have delved in magic. This is necessary. The best part 
of the scientific magic is speech. The Prophet is quoted as 


saying, "Verily, some of the speech is charming". Plato also said 
in his book Al-Fusul 5 , "As a friend may turn into an enemy by 
unfortunate words, an enemy may become a friend by nice 
words." Is not that a sort of magic? 

The practical science deals with the three generating origins 
and with what the orbiting planets are emanating in them from 
the planets' forces. This is termed as the special attributes by 
their authors although they do not know their causes or realities 
and they do not see any need to uncover the secrets of the 
forbearers or their (the three origins) mood in interacting with 
one another. The element heat is sought before the incense to 
get the help of the complete forces to overcome the incomplete 
forces, or a natural heat is sought from food. No other types of 
heats are sought and no help by animal or human spirits is 
needed. The magical tricks called nayranjat are the best type of 
this practical magic. 

You may also know, my brother, that some of the magic is 
gained and some are tricks. The gained part is about what the 
Designer of the paths of the D, 5, and 9 has done. In this regard, 
it is noteworthy to quote The Almighty, "Take four birds, tame 
them to turn to thee" 6 . 

The ancient Greeks specialized in the nayranjat, flipping the 
eye 'Tarjih' 7 , and talismans, which they called 'Syllogismus', 
which means bringing down the high spirits. They call the 
totality of the above magic. The ancient Greeks were not able to 
deal with this science without astrology. What is necessary to 
know about astrology is that the celestial equator, which is 
known as the crown, consists of planets. It is also necessary to 
know that these planets are grouped into twelve signs, which 


~*Book of Aphorisms 
6 Sura 2, verse 260 

n 

preponderance 


12 


13 



*»S{Picatrix)»> 


have certain implications on all beings in this world and that the 
seven planets have certain fortunes acquired from the signs 
according to their particular direction and situation. 
Furthermore, it is essential to know the relevant characteristics 
of similar signs, the characteristics of the seven planets, the two 
nodes and their positions in the celestial band, the 
characteristics of the planets' implications on all beings in this 
world, what happens to the seven planets individually and in 
their inter-relationships, as well as the authentic implications of 
the principles governing the behavior of stars. Moreover, it is 
imperative to know how to exploit the most dominant of the 
seven planets, the order of its dominance and how to pull out 
its arrows. Additionally, it is crucial to know the position of the 
seven planets in the celestial band. This knowledge about 
astrology is necessary. It is available for anyone who would like 
to have more information in available books. In this regard, the 
Wise said, "I am the One who is elevated above the seven 
heavens". He means that He attains them with his intellectual 
faculty. The Almighty also said in this regard, "And We raised 
him (Prophet Idris) to a lofty station" 8 . 


X Sura 19 verse 57 



-^Chapter Three^* 

Y OU MAY KNOW, O seeker of the truth and reality of 
astrology, that the celestial sphere is a physical ball 
perfectly circular, and so is everything contained 
therein at all times and in all states. Some people 
thought that certain events may change the circular shape of the 
celestial sphere at certain times. By no means will this ever 
happen because the shape of the celestial sphere is the cause for 
its shape, since its essence has this shape. I mean that it is the 
first to be a perfect shape, and this perfect shape is the circle 
because this circle is made of one line. This is the primary cause 
of perfection. However, this cannot be easily proved. Astrology 
is an essence and dividing it into angles is a man-made 
technique. If we start with this technique, we will ascend from it 
to the essential obligation. 

The method of learning this subject must follow a reversed 
procedure. Similarly, learning the technique of angles is the 
approach of learning the state of the celestial sphere. Nothing of 
the celestial bodies in the world of formation and dissolution 
will have a place in the celestial sphere and no part of the 
celestial sphere will have a place in the world of formation and 
dissolution at all unless that is achieved by coercion. As we 
mentioned, the celestial sphere is perfectly rounded from all 
sides. It is formed by one curved line; there is a point inside it 


14 


15 


^{Picatrix}> 


-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


and all distances from this point to the circumference are equal. 
This point is the center and the lines refer to the beams of 
planets cast on the world at the center. This is the influence of 
talismans. It acts as if it is an edge or a drawing that has been 
agreed upon. Since the celestial sphere is a comprehensive ball 
encompassing the entire world, there is no space or living 
beings beyond it. 

Ether is in a static state; it is the medium where other 
celestial bodies return. The celestial bodies are located in its 
abdomen in a slanting position from the center, because its 
center is at the side of the slanting center of the earth. The 
behavior of all celestial bodies is the same, and follows the 
motion of the celestial sphere. The heat emanating from it 
contributed to bringing this world to its being. The number of 
angles of the celestial sphere are 360, and the number of images 
is 360. The rules (for the management of the world) are built in 
because they follow certain ratios. 

Some people surmised that the celestial sphere is useful, that 
the usefulness of ether in the higher world is demonstrated by 
planets and heat and that the pictures within the angles 
resemble the positions of the planets when they combine 
together. 

Others believed that the pictures within the sphere's angles 
are the heart of astrology and the cause of all beings. 

As for the angles' functions, when an angle falls within a 
point, any point, where one of the fixed planets is situated and 
at the same time one of the orbiting planets gets to that point, 
then you will know that is the status of that planet's influence 
on Earth. Examples are: 5 moves cold and dryness; % moves 
heat and humidity; o' moves heat and dryness; 9 moves low 
heat and high humidity; 9 moves low heat and dryness; and the 
T) moves cold and humidity. 

The fixed planets have similar functions. Thus, if an angle 
has the function of a planet that moves heat and releases low 


dryness and humidity to its followers, and the O alone was at 
that place, then it decides that dryness and humidity must grow 
and increase. Similarly, if it happens that the planet is 
functioning by the O's force, the growth will be faster. This was 
a very difficult and vague subject for ancient philosophers. 
Vagueness, to them, is to veil the apparent meaning of the text 
and conceal its intrinsic meaning. This is called vagueness, so be 
aware of that. 



16 


17 




-^Chapter Four^ 


T HEN WHEN THE PEOPLE needed to make talismans, 
they found that they must know the planets' direct 
ratios, affecting their spreading functions, which are the 
essence of making talismans. I am presenting to you 
some of these ratios to be used as foundations upon which 
further steps can be built. This, therefore, becomes the 
astrological subject for making talismans. The maker of a 
talisman must be knowledgeable of the astrological ratios and 
formulas, confident of what he is doing and clear of any doubt 
or uncertainty in what he is doing in order to enforce the 
function of the speaking soul whereby the will, from the same 
causes reaches its (the talisman's) maker to obtain the sought 
result. I would like to introduce you to a certain state in the 
space close to our world, that is, do not start any work until the 
D is in the position of the degree that produces this function. 
There are certain functions for the “5 that are apparent. I will 
present a group of these functions later. At this time, I would 
like to talk about the functions of the D in relationship to its 
particular position, in accordance with the consensus of the 
Indians, especially when it is in the 28th position. 

1. THE HOUSE OF AL-SHARATAIN^ 

It starts from the beginning of the position to 12 °, 51 26 

from it. The Indians indicate that when the ”5 is at this 


19 



->^{Picatrix}2«- 


•*2{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


position, they travel and use laxative medicines. Thus, you may 
use this as a principle in making a talisman for a traveler and 
his safety. Also, when the "5) is at this position, a talisman can be 
made to create discord and animosity between spouses or two 
friends. Furthermore, at this position, a talisman can be made to 
arrange for a particular slave to escape or be released, and 
another to sabotage a partnership agreement between partners 
because it is a fiery evil. I would like, at this juncture, to advise 
you of a principle: Let the D always serve good deeds, and be 
safe and clear of any sinister or burning act. However, if it 
serves evil and sinister acts, let it bum. I want you to 
understand that. 

-^{ 2 . THE HOUSE OF AL-BOTEIN^ 

It consists of 12°, 51 ', 26 " starting from the HP position to 
25°, 42 ', 52 " from °C. Talismans are made at this position for 
drilling wells and rivers, achieving wishes and digging out 
buried treasures. Other talismans are made to help the growth 
of crops or they may be made to sabotage a marriage before it is 
consummated. Some talismans create excitement and 
stimulation because of their fiery fortune. Talismans may also 
be made at this position to release a slave or to worsen the 
situation for a captive to harm him. 

*^3. THE HOUSE OF AL-THURAYYA 9 

It consists of 25°, 42 ', 52 " starting from HT to 8°, 34 ', 18 " 
from ~if. Talismans at this position are made for the safety of 
those who travel by sea, for sabotaging a partnership, for 
releasing a prisoner or torturing him, for the beneficial use of 
chemistry and fire, for hunting, for promoting friendship and 
love between spouses, for destroying sheep, goats and cows, 
and for a slave to disobey his master until he is released. This 


^The Pleiades Constellation. 


type of talisman usually brings good luck. Thus, you may be 
aware of that. 

•»2{4. THE HOUSE OF AL-DEBARAn}2«* 

It consists of 8°, 34 ', 18 " starting from 'if to 21°, 25 ', 44 " 
from it. Talismans are made at this position to corrupt a city, to 
build a building which is not expected to last or to stay in good 
condition, for destroying crops, for maintaining a slave under 
his master's control, for ruining the relationship between 
spouses and maintaining estrangement between them, for 
bringing about bad luck to a person engaged in drilling, as well 
as causing misfortune for a person digging out buried goods 
and talismans for attracting scorpions and snakes. 

**§{ 5 . THE HOUSE OF AL-HAQ'a}^ 

It consists of 21°, 25 ', 44 “ starting from 'if to 4°, 17 ', 10 " 
from I. Talismans at this position are made to promote the 
welfare of children, for advancing in their education in Islam, in 
writing and in trades, a talisman for the safety of a traveler and 
his well being as well as a speedy voyage. A talisman for the 
safe structure of buildings, for sabotaging partnerships, for 
promoting reconciliation between spouses especially if the *5 
and the star of destiny represent a constellation sign of a good 
human being clear of misfortunes and burning as we mentioned 
above. The constellations that represent human beings are: I, 
HP, Q, /, and 3ft. 

**S{6. THE HOUSE OF AL-HAN'AH JO** 

It consists of 4°, 17 10 " starting from I to 17°, 8 36 " of 

it. Talismans at this position are made for corrupting cities and 
confining them, for retaliating from kings, for inflicting harm 
and damage on enemies, for ruining crops and trusts, for 
promoting the welfare of partners and the conditions of 
hunting, and for causing adverse effects of medications when 
they are administered. 


20 


21 



-$Picatrix}> 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


-$7. THE HOUSE OF AL-DHIRa}^ 

It consists of 17°, 8 36 " starting from I to the end of it. 

Talismans at this position are made for the promotion and 
blessing of trade and crops, as well as the safety of a voyager, 
for reconciliation between partners and friends, for preventing 
flies from entering a place of trade where they may spoil the 
product and necessitate redoing it. For the fulfillment of a wish 
from a ruler or a dignitary whom you hope to meet, for 
promoting the welfare of an escaped slave, for disposing of 
property, a house or money or similar assets from a person. 

*€{8. THE HOUSE OF AL-NATHRAH 

It starts from the beginning of 69 to 12°, 51 ', 26 " from it. 
Talismans are made at this position for reconciling love and 
friendship to an estranged couple, for the welfare of a traveler, 
for a longer period of imprisonment of captives and prisoners, 
for the deterioration of kingdoms, and a talisman to repel mice 
and bedbugs. 

*$9. THE HOUSE OF AL-TARf}^ 

It consists of 12°, 51 ', 26 " starting from 69 to 25°, 42 ', 52 " 
from it. Talismans are made at this position for ruining crops, 
disgracing travelers on land, causing harm to others, planting 
discord among partners and for jailing an adversary whose 
harm is sought. 

-$10 . THE HOUSE OF AL-JABHAh}3*- 
It consists of 25°, 42 ', 52 " starting from 69 to 8°, 34 ', 18 " 
from 61. Talismans at this position are made for reconciling 
differences between spouses, for harming the enemy or a 
traveler, for making the situation worse for a captive, for 
strengthening the structure of a building, and for bringing 
partners together for their mutual benefit. 


■$11. THE HOUSE OF AL-ZUBRAH^ 

It consists of 24°, 47', starting from 61 to 21°, 35 ', 2 " from it. 
Talismans at this position are made for gaining the compassion 
of kings, dignitaries and brothers, for planting discord, 
animosity, disease, complications and destruction, for an 
opportunity to meet kings and appeal for their favors, for 
contacting dignitaries and endeavoring to pay for releasing a 
slave. Talismans for these purposes are recommended for 
releasing captives, for besieging cities, for increasing trade as 
well as for promoting the welfare of a traveler, for a strong and 
long-lasting building and for reconciliation between two 
partners. 

•$12. THE HOUSE OF AL-SARFAh}^ 

It consists of 21°, 25 ', 44 " starting from 61 to 4°, 17 ', 10 " 
from HP. Talismans at this position are made for increasing 
farms and newly planted trees, for inflicting harm on a person 
by causing him to lose his assets, for breaking ships down, for 
promoting the welfare of partners as well as for reconciling 
differences between them for improved work conditions and 
product, and for improvement of conditions for successful 
hunting. 

*$13. THE HOUSE OF AL-AWWA'}3‘* 

It consists of 4°, 17 ', 10 " starting from to 17 °, 8 ', 36 " 
from it. Talismans at this position are made for promoting trade 
and farms, for enhancing the welfare of a traveler and the 
consummation of marriage between spouses, for releasing 
captives and for contacting kings and dignitaries. So be aware 
of that. 

*$14. THE HOUSE OF AL-SIMArJO*- 
It consists of 17°, 8 ', 36 " starting from ^ to a complete 30° 
from it. Talismans at this position are made for reconciling 


22 


23 



•»S(Picatrix}3«- 


-»2{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


differences between spouses, for recovery from illness by 
treatment, for ruining farms and newly planted trees as well as 
damaging trusts, for harming a traveler, for the promotion of 
the welfare of a slave and a voyager and for bringing agreement 
and harmony among partners. 

THE HOUSE OF AL-GHAFAR 

It starts from Q to 12°, 51 ', 26 " from it. Talismans at this 
position are made for drilling wells, digging up and retrieving 
treasures, for obstructing a traveler from making his trip, for 
creating discord between spouses, for spoiling friendship 
between friends and ruining partnership relations, for expelling 
and expatiating enemies and for the destruction of communities 
and towns. 

-«§{l6 . THE HOUSE OF AL-ZUBANa}]** 

It consists of 12°, 51 ', 26 " starting from Q to 25°, 42 ', 52 " 
from it. Talismans at this position can be made for damaging 
merchant shops, newly planted trees and farms, for separating 
friends and spouses, for the severe punishment of the wife if the 
husband so desires, for harming a traveling adversary and 
creating discord between partners, as well as for releasing 
captives from captivity. 

*^{l7. THE HOUSE OF AL-IKUl}^ 

It consists of 25°, 42 ', 52 " starting from Q to 8°, 34 ', 18 " 
from nu Talismans at this position can be made for the 
improvement and increase of livestock, for isolating cities and 
stab ilizin g buildings, as well as for the safety of a traveler at sea. 
There is a consensus that a friendship initiated when the “5 is at 
this house will not be broken. Accordingly, this house is 
selected for tailoring talismans to make friends. 

*^18. THE HOUSE OF AL-KALb}§«* 


It consists of 8°, 34 ', 18 " starting from to 21°, 25 ', 44 " 
from it. Talismans at this position can be made for pledging 
loyalty to kings to help them overcome their enemies, for 
stabilizing buildings, for marrying a widow, a divorced woman 
or a deflowered but not married woman when the "5 is at the 
House of cf and when it is at the Previous House. Also, 
talismans can be made at this position for releasing slaves, for 
the growth of newly planted trees and the safety of a voyager, 
as well as for creating disagreement among partners. 

•»s{l9. THE HOUSE OF AL-SHAULAH^ 

It consists of 21°, 25 ', 44 " starting from IR* to 4°, 17 ', 10 " 
from /. Talismans at this position can be made for isolating 
cities, defeating enemies, fulfilling wishes, making a person lose 
all his money, for separation and alienation, for the welfare of a 
traveler and the growth of crops, for releasing a slave or 
enabling him to escape from his master, for breaking ships 
down and destroying them, for creating discord among 
partners and for enabling captives and prisoners to escape. 

■*§{ 20 . THE HOUSE OF AL-NA' AIm}§*’ 

It consists of 4°, 17 ', 10 " starting from / to 17°, 8 ', 36 " 
from it. Talismans at this position can be made for the discipline 
of riding animals which are hard to tame, for a speedy travel 
and making the distance shorter, for bringing a concerned 
person home, for promoting friendship, for restricting captives, 
as well as for worsening the situation for partners. 

■*§{ 21 . THE HOUSE OF AL-BAL'DAH^ 

It consists of 17°, 8 ', 36 " starting from / to a complete 30° 
from it. Talismans at this position can be made for stabilizing 
buildings, increasing crops, for retaining assets and live stock, 
for ensuring the safety of travelers and for a wife to be divorced 
from her husband and never to be able to marry again. 


24 


25 



-$Picatrix}*> 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim^ 


$22. THE HOUSE OF SA'D AL-DA'BIH }]«* 

It starts at the beginning of % to 12°, 51 ‘, 26 “ from it. 
Talismans at this position can be made for the treatment and 
recovery from diseases, for the separation of spouses and 
lovers, for causing a certain woman to be raped, for the release 
and escape of a slave from his location, for creating discord 
between partners and for the release of captives and prisoners. 

$23. THE HOUSE OF SA'D BULA$ 

It consists of 12°, 51 ‘, 26 " starting from % to 25°, 42 52 " 

from it. Talismans at this position can be made for the treatment 
and recovery from diseases, for damaging assets, for 
estrangement between spouses as well as for releasing or saving 
captives. 

"€{ 24 . THE HOUSE OF SA' D AL-SU' Ud}3«- 
It consists of 25°, 42 ', 52 " starting from % to 8°, 34 ', 18 " 
from 3ft. Talismans at this position can be made for the 
improvement of merchant shops and the condition of spouses, 
for bringing victory to armies and military detachments, for 
damaging the circumstances of partners and also for releasing 
captives. Additionally, he who tries to start a trade at this 
position will not be successful and will never be able to finish 
what he started. So be aware of that. 

$25. THE HOUSE OF SA'D AL-ALIBIYA $ 

It consists of 8°, 34 ', 18 " starting from 3ft to 21°, 25 ', 44 " 
from 3ft. Talismans at this position can be made for isolating 
cities, for harming and defeating enemies, for dispatching 
successful messengers and spies, for damaging crops and 
rendering a husband impotent, for making the situation worse 
for a captive and for establishing and stabilizing buildings. 


$26 . THE HOUSE OF AL-FARGH AL-MUKDIM 

It consists of 21°, 25 ', 44 " starting from 3ft to 4°, 17 ', 10 " 
from X. Talismans at this position can be made for achieving all 
sorts of good things: for restoring love and friendship, for the 
fulfillment of the wish of a traveler to be able to make a trip, for 
stabilizing buildings, for the safety of travelers by ships, for 
damaging the relationships between partners and for 
restraining a captive and torturing him. 

$27. THE HOUSE OF AL-FARGH AL-MU'HIr}^ 

It consists of 4°, 17 ', 10 " starting from X to 17°, 8 ', 36 " 
from it. Talismans at this position can be made for a successful 
trade, productive crops and quick recovery from diseases, for 
damaging the assets of the person you are concerned with, for 
damaging the relationship between spouses and for hurting 
someone riding on a ship, prolonging the captivity of a prisoner 
and harming slaves. 

-$28 . THE HOUSE OF AL-RISHA, OR BATN AL-HUT $ 

It consists of 17°, 8 ', 36 " starting from X to the end of X. 
Talismans at this position are made for a successful trade, 
productive crops, treatment of diseases and destroying trusts, for 
ensuring a traveler's safety, for restoring relationships between 
spouses, and for restraining, harming and torturing prisoners, as 
well as for hurting someone riding on a ship. You should be 
aware of that. 

The Indians relied on the above 28 pictures in their choices 
and attempts. That is what we have found as we reviewed their 
books in this regard. The important thing, as we mentioned 
above, is that when you try to do good things, the D must be 
clear of any misfortune or any burning and replete with good 
luck. Also when you start a good endeavor, let the D move from 


26 


27 



-$Picatrix}> 


-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


one good luck star to another and when you start an evil act, 
you do the opposite. So you should be aware of that. 

As we have mentioned before, the talisman maker needs to 
be certain of what he is doing. He needs to be prepared and 
ready to accept the outcome of the intended effects. This 
readiness can only be realized in the human experience. 
However, preparedness, in fact, is the reaction of the physical 
realities, such as the preparedness of wax to accept the picture 
and the reaction of the killed to the killer; it is the preparedness 
of the killed to accept the killing because his organs are too 
weak to fight. Preparedness for weakness develops in reaction 
to strength. This kind of strength must be available in the 
substances needed to make talismans, since not every substance 
is good for every action. 

There is a consensus on this principle in all available books. 
Since there should be preparedness and readiness for 
acceptance, acceptance must already be there and because 
acceptance must already be there, the sought action will exist 
and emerge. Existence is the acceptance to reflect the picture so 
that the primordial acceptance and the picture become one, 
such as a person's picture sticking to water or to a mirror, as 
well as the incorporation of the divine deity to a human being, 
as in Christianity, and the incorporation of the soul to the body. 
So understand that and be aware of it. This is to let you know 
that my objective in presenting these details is only to uncover 
what the people have concealed. Allah, Most High, does not 
entrust these details except to those whom He pleases. This is 
His way of doing things, praise be to Him. 

Going back to our objective, I would like to say that if you 
are working during the daytime, let the D be in the ascendant, 
and let the ascendant be one of the daytime constellations. 
Similarly, if you are working during the night, let that be one of 
the night-time constellations. If the ascendant is one of the 
straight-ascending constellations, work will progress smoothly 


to the end, however, if the ascendant is one of a curved- 
ascending constellations, work becomes difficult. 

Nonetheless, what determines whether work is good or bad 
depends on whether the overlooking planets are bad luck or 
good luck planets. If the ascendant was in a straight-ascending 
constellation, but a bad luck planet was looking over it, or there 
was bad luck in it, that will damage the work and make it very 
difficult. But if it was in a curved-ascending constellation, and a 
good luck planet was looking over it, or if there is good luck in 
it, that will make work easy. Similarly, if the daytime and night 
time constellations ascend in a different form; that is if the 
daytime constellations ascend at night and the night time 
constellations at daytime and the good luck planets are looking 
over them, work will progress, but if the bad luck constellations 
are looking over, it will become more evil. 

A talisman maker must necessarily be knowledgeable of the 
straight, curved, fixed, variable, of the physical shape, as well as 
of the night time and daytime constellations. Moreover, he must 
necessarily be knowledgeable of the good luck and bad luck 
planets, the clarity of the D from any symptom of diseases it 
may be exposed to, and which planet and constellation are used 
for what type of talismans. He must also be aware of the D's 
eclipse. 

Avoid as much as you can the D's eclipse when making 
talismans for good deeds. Wait until it is released from this 
knot; that is when the D advances or stays behind the O's 
aphelion 10 by 12° from the beginning of the eclipse to the 
aphelion of the O, and 12° after it leaves the aphelion of the O. 
Also beware of the presence of 9 or 5 within 12°, or if the D is 
declining towards the southern latitude or advancing ahead of 
Al-Ras or Al-Deneb 11 or entering or facing the O by less than 


10 That point of a planet's or comet's orbit at which it is farthest from the o ,-OED 
11 Al-Ras, the Head; Al-Deneb, the Tail. 


28 


29 



-»S{Picatrix}> 


12°. Then it will be burning because it will be in contact with the 
O. This is the worst misfortune; its motion will be slow and it 
may not be able to reach the 12° destination. In this case, its 
motion resembles 5's motion. It will be on its way to burning, 
the climax of which starts from 18° from Q to 3° from ITU or that 
can be at the end of the constellations because it is within the 
domain of the stars causing misfortune. Or it could be declining 
from the midst of the sky to Al-Tasi'. 12 

When a necessary task that you cannot delay crops up, 
improve the situation of the D by letting 9 and Z be in the 
ascendant or in the midst of the sky, and they will protect the "5 
from getting burned. 


^Literally, “the Ninth”, referring to the astrological house of that number and also 
considered the Mid Heaven. See chart. 



-^Chapter Five}&- 


E xamples of the celestial bodies' relationships 

relied on in the making of talismans: 


& 

A talisman for two lovers to get together 
and to have a long-lasting relationship 
Talismans of this type are made when the ascendant is in the 
hour of Z, and Al-Ras and the D together with 9 are conjunct to 
them or facing them and when the sign of Al-Sabi is connected 
to the sign of the ascendant in a triangular or a hexagonal 13 
form. Combine them side by side and bury them in the location 
of love. A talisman of this type is also made for a man who 
leaves his family whom you wish to have return. 




A talisman for the destruction of an enemy that 
you want to drive away from his location. 

A talisman for such a purpose is made in the hour of O' 
when the D is in HU. Bring as much misfortune as you can to the 


13 


These are Trine and Sextile respectively. 


30 


31 


^Picatrix}^ 


^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}3«* 


ascendant as well as to its master. Also bring misfortune to the 
house of fatefulness and let the ascendant master be connected 
to the house of destiny. Additionally, bring misfortune to the 
house of the ascendant and into the house of fatefulness which 
will be connected to a misfortune in Al-Rabi or in Al-Sabi. Bury 
the talisman outside the city. 

A talisman for the destruction of a city. 

Perceive the image of the ascendant of that town and bring 
misfortune to the house of its livelihood and to its house of 
fatefulness, to the master of the ascendant, to the D and to the 
house of the master of the ascendant. Bring misfortune to Al- 
Ashir and bury it in the middle of the city. 

A talisman to improve a city or a location. 

It is made with the ascendant of a Sa'ad 14 ; bring good luck to 
Al-Ashir, to the master of Al-Thani and to Al-Thamin. It also 
brings good luck to the “5 and to the master of the house of the 
D. Bury it in the middle of the city and you will see miracles, 
Allah willing. 

A talisman for the destruction of a city or a location. 

It is made in the hour of 5 when it is a planet of misfortune 
and through that you may bring misfortune to the city 
ascendant, to the ascendant's master, and to the house of the 
ascendant. You may let Al-Su'ud 15 be absent from the 
ascendant. Additionally, you may drop Al-Su ud and the poles 
from the triangle of the ascendant. Bury it in the middle of the 
city. 


^ 4 A good-luck star. 
^ Stars of good-luck. 


A talisman for expanding wealth and trade. 

Make a picture, after you bring good luck to the ascendant, 
to Al-Ashir and to their master, to the master of their house, to 
the D and its master, as well as to the master of the ascendant. 
You are also to give good luck to Al-Thani and its master and 
let the sign of Al-Thani mutually accept connection to the sign 
of the ascendant either in a triangular or hexagonal form. 
Furthermore, you may bring good luck to Al-Thani and let a 
share of fortune be in the ascendant or in Al-Ashir and have 
them join the share-holder while he is looking at his share. You 
may also give good luck to Al-Hadi-Ashar and to its master. 
The holder of this picture will be the wealthiest person on Earth. 
All his trade transactions will progress smoothly, and he will 
make good profits from every move he makes. 

A talisman for assuming a distinguished position. 

Make a talisman after bringing good luck to ascendant and 
to Al-Ashir and its master. Keep misfortunes away from the 
ascendant and its master. Make the master of Al-Hadi-Ashar a 
planet of good luck looking over the ascendant and its master. 
Let the master of Al-Ashir be affectionately connected to the 
master of the ascendant. When the person, who has this in mind 
and insists on meeting whom he seeks to assume leadership 
from, holds this picture, no one will be able to overrule him or 
challenge his opinion. 

A talisman to have a ruler favor a certain 
person and improve his status. 


32 


33 



•^Picatrix}^ 


^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Make a picture in his name and bring good luck to the 
ascendant by a strong Sa'ad. Let not the Sa'ad be retreating, 
declining, or burning, and let the master of the ascendant be 
strong, sound and righteous in his fortunes. Let the master of 
Al-Ashir be connected to the master of the ascendant in a 
triangular or hexagonal form and the former will give good luck 
to the latter. The master of Al-Ashir will be willingly connected 
to the master of the ascendant which is in the commanding 
constellations, while the master of Al-Ashir is in the obedient 
constellations. Never will the holder of this picture meet a ruler 
without getting his favor and having his status improved. 

A talisman for a slave to gain the sympathy 
of his master. 

Make two talismans: one in the hour of a high planet 
whereas the ascendant is high and the D is increasingly bright 
and let the ascendant of Al-Ras be with the ascendant or in one 
of the poles; the other in the hour of a lower planet and the 
ascendant and Al-Ashir of the first ascendant and the tail are 
either in the above-ascendant or in one of the poles. Combine 
them and bury them in the location of the person for whom you 
wish to create sympathy and his master will have total 
sympathy for him and give him whatever he wants, Allah 
willing. 

A talisman for a person who wants to get married but was not able 

to. 

Make two statues: one in the hour of 2 when the ascendant is 
HP, and when the D is increasingly bright in one of the poles; the 
second in the hour of 9 when it is looking over 2 , 5, and o'. 
Remove the bad luck from the ascendant and let Al-Sabi's 


ascendant be a part of the first statue and let its sign be 
connected to the sign of the first ascendant from the home of its 
triangle. Let them hug each other and bury them in the location 
of the person who wants to get married. 




A talisman for preventing a man from 
marrying a certain woman. 

Make a talisman in the hour of the ascendant of 61 and in the 
hour of 2 . Make another one in the hour of 69 and in the hour of 
the D when the *3 is increasingly bright, moving fast, and 
connected (to the ascendant). Then combine them and bury 
them in the hour of the 9 and he will never marry her. 


A talisman for releasing a captive. 

Make it in the hour of the D while it is increasingly bright, 
clear of any misfortune and moving quickly. Bury it in Al- 
Ashir's ascendant of the town and direct the picture towards the 
house of the Imam. 


A talisman to liquidate your enemy. 

Make two pictures: one in the hour of 61 and in the hour of 
O while the *3 is declining; make the other in the ascendant of 
69 and in the hour of o' which will also be declining like the D. 
Make the first picture retaliate from the second in any way you 
want and bury them in the hour of o' when HP is at any phase 
of its ascendant. Then you can request that your enemy be 
destroyed and he will be destroyed immediately. 


34 


35 



■ f 8{Picatrix} , > 


A talisman for the people to support a governor of a town whose 
population turned against him. 

Make two talismans: the first in the hour of % while the D is 
connected to the O in a blessed and sound form and clear from 
any misfortune and let the head of the Dragon be either in the 
ascendant or looking over it; make the second in the ascendant 
of Al-Khamis from the first and in the hour of 9. Let the hour of 
9 be with the Dragon or looking over it, and let the “5 be clear of 
any misfortune. Then bury both talismans in the hour of 5 when 
the ascendant is fixed and the entire populace will return to him 
and give him their full support. 

Sib 

A talisman for keeping a person in his hometown. 

Make a talisman in the hour of the ascendant of the person 
when 5 and Al-Ras are in one of the poles of the ascendant. 
Bury the talisman up-side-down in the middle of the town 
when the ascendant is fixed and he will never leave the town as 
long as the talisman is buried. 




A talisman for expelling a person from 
his hometown on the same day. 

Make a picture of an up-side-down ascendant while its sign 
is moving away from the poles and when the D is moving away 
from the poles. Bury it in the burning part of the way and face 
the statue towards the location to which you want him to be 
expelled, and the objective will be achieved. 


36 


^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Two talismans for bringing two persons together 
and promoting friendship between them 

Two talismans are made: make the first one in the hour of 
the ascendant of the sought objective, bring good luck to the 
ascendant and to Al-Ashir and move bad luck away from them, 
and let the ascendant of Al-Hadi-Ashir be a lucky planet 
connected harmoniously to the master of the ascendant in a 
triangular or hexagonal form. I would like to remind you here 
of what you should know; that is the hexagonal and triangular 
forms are indications of friendship, agreement and resemblance 
characters because the triangular form is from a fire 
constellation to a fire constellation, from an earth constellation 
to an earth constellation, from an air constellation to an air 
constellation and from a water constellation to a water 
constellation. Consequently, it becomes a friendship character. 
However, the hexagonal form is from a fire constellation to an 
air constellation, from an earth constellation to a water 
constellation. Thus when the two acting ascendants concur 
without being acted upon, this becomes a character of 
friendship without love. The quadrilateral 16 form is from a 
water constellation to a fire constellation, and from an air 
constellation to an earth constellation, and when they disagree 
by nature, the quadrilateral form becomes a character of 
alienation and hatred. 

We go back to our above presentation and say that when the 
second talisman is made for a certain friend, let it be in the 
ascendant of Al-Hadi-Ashar. If it is for a spouse, let it be in the 
ascendant of Al-Sabi and make the ascendant of the person 
whose sympathy you seek be connected harmoniously to the 
master of the first person. Bury them together in the location of 
the sympathy seeker and they will become companions forever. 


* 6 The astrological aspect known as the Square. 


37 



-^Picatrix}> 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


A talisman for separation and enmity. 

Make a talisman in the ascendant of Q and bring a great 
misfortune to the ascendant and also bring a strong misfortune 
to Al-Ashir. Moreover, bring great misfortunes to the master of 
the ascendant and to the master of Al-Ashir while they are 
situated in either a bilateral 17 or quadrilateral form and there 
will be no harmony between them. Strip off all good luck from 
him, from the ascendant, as well as from Al-Ashir and bury 
them in the residence of one of them and, as a result, they will 
separate irrevocably because of the intense hatred which has 
been created between them. 


A talisman to empower a sultan to liquidate his servant. 

Make the talisman in the same arrangement as mentioned 
above and let the master of the ascendant turn away from the 
master of Al-Ashir while he is also affected by his misfortune. 
At the same time, let the master of the ascendant be connected 
to the master of the house of destiny and the first will be 
affected by the last's misfortune as well by either facing each 
other or collectively. Bury them with a fixed ascendant 
misfortune, and consequently he will be able to kill his servant 
in any way and for any reason. 

Two talismans for affection and subordination. 

Two talismans are made in the first phase of 69 , and while 
the D is in the first phase of "if . Let 9 be in the ascendant and 
the D in Al-Hadi-Ashar. Make them embrace each other and 


17 


Opposition. 


bury them in one of their locations. This is an ever-lasting love 
and a very strong affection. This relationship is known as a 
reciprocal relationship. It was discussed by Ptolemy in his book. 
The Fruit, on page 33. You may review it. I will, nonetheless, 
explain it for you in Book IV. 

A talisman for permanent love. 

Make two talismans in an ascendant of good luck when the 
“5 and 9 are in 'if. In the first picture draw 220 numbers of 
thousands or zeros and draw in the second picture 284 numbers 
also of thousands and zeros. Then make them embrace one 
another and bury them in the location of one of them and 
permanent love and strong affection will ensue. This talisman is 
known as the talisman of the loving numbers. 

3& 

A talisman for catching fish. 

Draw a picture of any type of fish living in that river in the 
hour of 9 and in the ascendant of X when % is in it. The first 
part to draw is its head, then its body and then its tail 
respectively, and finally put them together at one time. Make a 
thin pole of silver and hold the fish from its end. Make a bowl 
of lead and erect the pole in it perpendicularly with the fish at 
its tip. Put the talisman in the bowl, fill it with water and close 
the bowl with the talisman in it tightly so that no water leaks 
out. Throw the ball in the bottom of the river and the fish will 
come to the talisman from all directions. 


A talisman to repel scorpions. 

Make a picture of a Scorpion with gold when the D is in the 
ascendant or in one of the poles such as 'if, or Si. The best of 


38 


39 



-»§{Picatrix}> 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


these is 61 because of its opposing character to IR/s character. 
Also let the O be in 61 while 9 is retreating. Draw the tail first, 
then the legs, then the arms and finally the head. Be sure to 
follow this reversed order in making a repelling talisman. When 
you are through, attach the left arm in place of the right leg and 
the right arm in place of the left leg. Attach the head in its place 
and the tail in its place. Make a thorn; place the Scorpion on its 
back; and then stick the thorn in its back whereby it will be 
biting itself in the head. Bury it in a hole inside a metal piece; 
then bury the metal piece in the most respectful place in town 
and then the Scorpions will flee from that talisman for a 
distance of one mile for forty-five days. 


the hour of 9 until it disappears. Make another one in the im age 
of a man, and when 9 is in is in HP and the ascendant is Jt. 
Beware of the difference in the ascendant lest 9 should be in 
and the ascendant is I or in 31 and the ascendant is ^P. Let 
the two pictures hug each other and put the hand of each 
picture on the back of its companion. All of this should take 
place in the hour of 9. Beware of the two ascendants, IT and HP, 
as well as others of the same type. Bury them in the busiest road 
in town and then men and women will like one another and 
have affectionate relationships. Do the same thing for a 
relationship of affection between two persons. Bury it in a place 
commonly visited by both. 


A talisman for the treatment of a scorpion bite. 

Carve a picture of a Scorpion on a stone of Bezoar 18 in the 
hour of the D and while the O is in the first degree of it and the 
ascendant is 61 or Mount the stone on a golden ring and 
stamp it with resin of Kundur 19 in the designated hour and with 
the T) in IR.. Give the bitten person a dose of it and he will be 
cured from his ailment. 


6b 

A talisman for affection between 
men and women. 

A talisman is made to portray the picture of a maid on cold 
solid metal when the ascendant is within which 9 is 
ascending to its apex having control over its affairs. Start it in 


1 ft 

A counter poison or antidote. The original sort was the Lapis Bezoar Orientale, obtained 
from the wild goat of Persia and various antelopes, etc. ; the Lapis Bezoar Occidentale, 
obtained from the lamas of Peru, was less valued.-OED 
19 

Incense resin. 


6b 

A talisman to catch more fish. 

It is presented by Mohammed Ben Bayt Al-Khawarizmi in 
his thesis in which he claims that he tested it. Make a picture of 
a fish in the hour of the "5 and in the ascendant of the first phase 
of X, within which are the 7) and 9. The fish will be caught at 
the time of fishing because this timing will help a great deal. 


6b 


A talisman for bringing the physician 
to the location of treatment. 

This talisman ought to be made by physicians. Carve on a tin 
plate a picture of a human being sitting down with physician's 
equipment in front of him; people are standing around him with 
water jugs in their hands asking him for advice. The carving 
should cover the entire plate while the ascendant is on one of 
the two homes of 9 within which is o'. The Dragon should be at 
the top (at the north pole of the celestial sphere) of the sky. The 
plate is nailed and placed in the required location and you will 
see miracles. 


40 


41 



•$Picatrix}3«- 


->§{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


A talisman for successful planting and cultivation. 

On a silver plate, make a picture of a man sitting down in the 
middle of plants and trees while the ascendant is O and when 
the "5 is in the ascendant connected to 5 and turning away from 
the O bury it in the location where you want all plants and trees 
to grow and quickly bear fruit and be protected from animals, 
cold, birds and other harmful things. 

& 

A talisman for a successful business. 

Make a picture of a man with a scale in his hand on a yellow 
plate when the ascendant is one of the two homes of o' and 
while the D is in it. A person holding the plate will see great 
success in his business, Allah willing. 


6b, 

A talisman for the relief of the pain of kidney stones. 

On a golden plate, carve a picture of a lion with stones 
between his hands as if he was playing with them in the hour of 
the O while the ascendant is the first phase of £1, and the O is in 
that degree. Then the person suffering from the attack of kidney 
stones will be relieved from pain. This has been tested. 




A talisman to treat a certain person from depression until he 
recovers completely and to protect 
him from harmful actions. 

It is made in the hour of the 9 when the D is in one of the 
poles connected to 9, and when the master of Al-Sadis is in a 
triangular or hexagonal form of a Sa'ad or facing a Sa'ad. The 
master of Al-Thamin is in the quadrilateral form of 9 and 9 is not 
retreating, burning or looking at a misfortune. The talisman is 
made in the last hour of Sunday while the master of the hour is 


the ascendant of Al-Ashir. Let it be made of pure silver and it 
will protect the person from what we have mentioned above. 

Talismans are that which should be made from the celestial 
bodies - planets and stars - in which case no one can invalidate 
their effects. One of its principles is that no talismans for love 
and affection should be made unless the D is with Al-Su ud and 
happy days. Likewise, they should not be made if the D is with 
Al-Nuhus 20 ; make them only when it is clear. For example, if 
you want to make a talisman for harmony among people, you 
should make it on the day of the 9 and in the hour of 2. If you 
want a talisman for affection between spouses, you should 
make it on the day of the O in the hour of the T>. Also, talismans 
for sympathy, love and meeting kings are made on the day of 
the "5 when it is full and in /, V, 69 or in X. If the Dragon is 
with the D, that will strengthen their effects. 

Always watch the D when it is in the lucky house and avoid 
it when it is in the unlucky house. Make a talisman for love 
when the D is with 9 and in the hour of 2 when it is with the D 
and either in X,/, or in 69. For malevolence, it is made when 
the D is with the tail and in one of the bad-luck houses joining 
misfortune planets or forming with them a quadrilateral figure 
or facing them. Talismans made at night are better than the ones 
made in daytime and with that you will hit the target. 

Another condition without which nothing can be achieved is 
that the talisman maker should be completely absorbed in his 
endeavor. Also he should clear his intention in order for his 
mental faculties to join the spiritual powers of the planets. Plato 
puts it very well when he says in his Book ofAl-Fusul, "If words 
reflect the intention of the speaker, he will be able to move the 
intention of the listener and vice versa." According to the first 
principle, this is what the combination of supplication and piety 


2 ®Bad luck stars. 


42 


43 



->S{Picatrix}> 


•♦SfGhayat Al-Hakim}> 


are based on when pious people pray to have their requests 
fulfilled. 

Another condition is to isolate yourself from human beings, 
to shelter yourself from the sunrise and the sunlight and not to 
be visited by anybody except those who have good intentions, 
trustworthy, not belittling or scorning the ugly, astounding and 
forceful effects of the astrological spiritual powers. Be aware of 
that. You may review what Tabit Ibn Qurra 21 wrote in his 
Treatise on Talismans, "The noblest science of stars is the science 
of talismans". He claims that there is no life in the body that 
does not have a spirit. He means that talismans made in the 
wrong manner and for the wrong purpose will not be 
compatible with the radiating spirit of the planets. Accordingly, 
they are similar to dead bodies that have no spirits in them. 
However, if the spirit of the celestial bodies agree, by virtue of 
their configuration and make-up, with such arrangements that 
lead to the sought objective, then they will be similar to living 
bodies that can do strange things. 

In this regard, Aristotle says in his Treatise that the most 
important thing to bear in mind, when making a talisman, is the 
effect of the seven moving planets. The highest and the longest 
lasting among these are the ones that coincide with a Sa'ad. This 
will help in bringing the spirits down from the celestial sphere 
to the Earth. He adds, "There may be some of God's names, if 
invoked to bring a spirit down, that will fall down at a 
tremendous speed to the lowest level, and it may kill the person 
who is bringing it down if he is not knowledgeable of the 
spiritual nature of the celestial body he wants to bring down". 

Concerning this matter, some of the leading Sufis talk about 
the Name of the Great Allah who transforms things into other 
things completely different from the original. They prefer to talk 
about sublime matters in this world. However, they, I mean the 


majority of them, believe otherwise. We wrote a piece on this 
subject in which we cited all of their contentions. 

Referring to Aristotle, he adds, "As for the magical 
transcendence, it does not go beyond the circle of the Earth 
when a talisman is made to bring down a spirit. However, this 
transcendence will not be effective unless it is associated with 
the Greatest God who commands it to revert in its entirety to 
the halo and directs it to the aphelion of the Earth". This is the 
text of his statement. I will cover it completely in the fourth 
book. 

The people who specialize in this field agree on the necessity 
of associating the words used in making talismans for special 
purposes appealing to have those effects accepted. In this 
regard, the philosopher in Timaeus, indicates that talking to 
talismans represents the relationship of the soul to the body; it 
moves the spiritual powers, especially when the speaker talks 
with a sound intention. This is the noble element with which all 
talismans can be made. This means that what you say must 
agree with the meaning of the spoken words inasmuch as the 
talisman maker gathers of his conscious and mental strength. 

An example of what can be said for love and affection is: 

I hereby unite so-and-so with so-and-so in harmony and love in the 
same manner fire and air, and water and earth are united. I also move 
so-and-so's spirit the same way the 0 moves the light and power of the 
world, conjure up so-and-so in the eyes of so-and-so the same way the 
sky is decorated with high and dominating stars and the way plants 
are decorated with their flowers. I also make so-and-so's spirit rise and 
impress so-and-so's spirituality the same way fire rises to air and 
water to earth. Moreover, so-and-so may not drink or enjoy except in 
the presence of so-and-so. 

If you make a talisman for enmity and separation, you say: 

I hereby sever the relationships between them and separate so-and- 
so from so-and-so with the power of these spiritual souls the same way 


21 


See Thorndike I, 661, this person was identified by Ritter in the German ed. 


44 


45 



-€{Picatrix}> 


light is separated from darkness. I also make enmity between them 
similar to the enmity between water and fire. 

If you make a talisman for rendering a male impotent, you 
say: 

I hereby tie up the spirit of the sexual desire of so-and-so towards 
so-and-so as well as towards all other women and deprive him from it 
with the power of these spiritual souls the same way mountains and 
their rocks are tied up. 

To untie the sexual desire of a male, you say: 

I hereby release and untie the sexual desire of so-and-so towards 
so-and-so as well as towards all other women with the help of the 
powers of all of these spiritual souls the same way fire melts wax, the 
same way sunlight releases darkness and the spirits of the world as 
well as its oum spirit and the same way snow is melted by the O. 

To silence people who talk negatively about you as well as 
about others, you say: 

1 hereby shield so-and-so to silence backbiters with the shield of 
light and veil their eyes with a spiritual veil to repel their ugly looks 
and to silence them and vanquish their harmful designs. You may 
add similar specific statements with true intentions and strong 
motivation. 

To expose the secrets of a person, you say: 

I hereby unveil the secrets of so-and-so with the power of these 
spiritual souls the same way sunbeams tear up thick clouds, disgrace 
him and make him a target for the spirit of backbiters the same way 
arrows tear up bodies by frequent arrow hunters. 

When you are in the process of doing your work, do not say 
anything unrelated to your intended objective. Everything you 
say must support and enforce your intended objective. 

These examples are presented to you to let you understand 
the intended objective so that you may apply it. 

We have presented to you this knowledge although those 
who seek knowledge nowadays are few. So be one of those few, 
and you will, Allah willing, acquire wisdom. We have included 


-^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}^ 

miraculous matters in this chapter about the relationships of 
planets and stars. Think seriously about them, and you may 
refer to them for analogy when making any talisman that has 
already been or is being made in this world. 

The essence of talismans, which we have mentioned above, 
is similar to the intended performed action whether good or 
evil. After this, I will explain to you what share of the three 
originating sources, metals, animals and plants, as well as their 
incense and sacrifices. All of these will help you in the same 
way food and medicine, if accepted by the patient, will help the 
physician succeed and accomplish what he hopes to achieve. 
The focal point is the observation of stars. The Greek 
philosophers used to watch a certain planet when it is with its 
Dragon and when it approaches within a degree from the 
middle of the sky, they perfume with its incense and appeal to it 
to achieve their objectives. They offer sacrifices to it on behalf of 
their sought objective. Consequently, they get what they hoped 
to achieve. They also claim that one should do the same thing if 
the planet is in the Tail of its Dragon, and subsequently, it will 
not be obstructed especially if the planet makes a good 
recommendation concerning the birth of the person in question. 
This will have a stronger effect and better acceptance. 

Obtaining this knowledge, my brother, is a great honor 
although those who are seeking it in our time are only few, and 
those few have missed the approach for seeking it and learning 
it. We have mentioned, may Allah bless you, in our book which 
we entitled The Rank of the Wise that having good knowledge of 
the produced result of a well-made (talisman) is greater and 
more honorable than it's result. I would like you to know that 
what we have pointed out is the behavioral art and learning it 
according to the inherent characteristics of the art of nature 
without delaying what should be advanced or advancing what 
should have been delayed. To explain the reality of this subject 
and its philosophy, we bring two persons: one is knowledgeable 


•^Picatrix)^ 


of this result and acts upon it, while the second is 
knowledgeable of the other result and acts upon that. On the 
other hand, they may be ignorant of these arts, try to obtain 
them at least on the traditional level. The person who is 
completely knowledgeable of the magical result is more capable 
and more miraculously effective in this world than a person 
who is fully knowledgeable of the first result. This is an axiom 
for those who think about them and accept them as such. We 
would like you to know that our reference to this subject in our 
book. The Rank of the Wise, is very essential for applying these 
arts according to their principles and using them for what they 
are capable of achieving. 




^{Chapter Six}§** 


Y OU MAY KNOW, Allah bless you, that wisdom is very 
noble and acquiring it is a great honor and carries with 
it high prestige. Wisdom has different levels. One level 
leads to another. A fully knowledgeable person is the 
one who is well informed of the fruits of wisdom. He obtains 
them because he loves to obtain them. Philosophers have justly 
identified this level as the preference of wisdom. He who 
remains below this level is not considered a human being, 
although he may be a human being only by planning, because 
he does not reflect on the essence of his being, which is a 
microcosm of the larger world. The truth of his being is that he 
is a complete entity characterized by three elements: speech, 
animals and plants. This entity is characterized differently from 
animals by speech. By speech, we mean that it is distinguished 
because of its capability to make (talismans), recalling the absent 
through reflection and forming an image and perceiving what 
cannot be physically seen. Also, this entity can bring other 
beings and countries into his mind, combine all other beings 
and powers within itself through which he can see at night what 
happens to him during the daytime. Accordingly, he is a 
microcosm confined within the larger world which he 
represents in form and content. He has all the characteristics of 
animals, but he is differentiated by knowledge and power. 





^Picatrix}> 


A human has six movements which run along his back bone 
through his thighs in a straight line. He is brought to life 
accidentally and this accidental being will die as a principle of 
nature. His fingers and palm are distributed and his head is 
round. He has nails and a particular style of walking; he is 
capable of learning and writing; he is the inventor of fine arts; 
he imitates animals but not imitated by them; he laughs and 
weeps with sadness and he possesses a divine power and the 
ability of civil management. He is an idol externally and a light 
internally; his body is the idol and its content is his entity. He is 
well planned; he knows what is harmful to him and what is 
useful. He acts with an intention if he plans and he proceeds or 
abstains spontaneously as well as with a purpose. He invents 
fine arts as well as miraculous talismans. He comprehends the 
various aspects of knowledge and excludes whatever is 
tangible. 

Allah made him a treasurer for His wisdom and an 
expression of Himself as well as all of His creatures. He made 
him accept His revelation and made him aware of His branches 
of knowledge as well as what was revealed from Him. He is the 
guidance for the larger world and its destiny. He is all-knowing 
of every detail about His creation and its composition. He can 
gather all scattered creatures, whereas they cannot do the same 
to Him. He can make them subservient, but they cannot do the 
same to Him. He is capable of uttering their words, drawing 
their pictures with His hands, describing them with His tongue, 
and He is also capable of foretelling their characteristics. 

No animal can change itself or move away from its created 
image, and it cannot imitate the voice of other animals. A 
rooster cannot change its crowing, a dog its barking or a lion its 
roaring. However, a man can change his voice and his manners 
and he can act in any way he wants and he can administer 
himself as well as others. He is characterized by a dense body 
and an amiable spirit; one part is amiable and the other is dense; 


50 


*$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


one part is alive and the other is dead; one half is moving and 
the other half is idle; one half is formed and the other is 
formless; one half is night-time and the other is daytime; one 
half is darkness and the other is light; one half is concealed, and 
the other is exposed; one half is tangible and the other is 
reasonable; one half is the sustainer and the other is the 
sustained. He shies away from shameful deeds and tolerates 
and does whatever he likes and regrets. His essence is 
composed of gentle as well as harsh characteristics; he possesses 
some of the harsh characteristics of earth, the gentle touch of 
air, the friendliness of fire and the coolness of water. 
Accordingly, he is moderate in his motion, which is the soul of 
life. By his motion he recognizes the heat of fire through its fiery 
power and the coolness of water through the inherent coolness 
of water and so on with the rest of the Elements. 

Nonetheless, his head resembles the celestial sphere by its 
shape and roundness as well as by the good inlaid lights such as 
seeing, smelling, tasting and speaking. His eyes are similar to 
the O and the D, his nostrils to the two winds, his ears to the 
East and West, his front to the day and his back to the night, his 
walking to the motion of stars and his sitting to their being 
fixed, his retreat to their decline and his death to their burning. 

His abdominal organs are seven equal to the number of the 
moving planets. He has seven bones in his head equal to the 
number of days in the week, 24 vertebras in his back equal to 
the number of hours of the day and night, and 28 joints equal to 
the number of the houses of the D and the number of the 
alphabets. The number of his intestines are equal to the lunar 
phases, and the number of arteries are 365 with an equal 
number of veins, and that is equal to the number of days and 
nights of the year, as well as to the number of the celestial 
degrees. The number of his different characteristics are equal to 
the number of changes in the time of the year. 


51 



-»^{Picatrix}> 


His eyes are his spies with speaking power resembling a 
king. His ears are his informants; his tongue is his translator; his 
heart is his divan of knowledge; his stomach is his treasury; his 
gall bladder is the source of his patience so that his flesh will not 
rupture. It is the bond and treatment of the body. His lungs are 
his fan; the hands are his guards and his legs are his vehicle. 

His flesh is equivalent to earth; his bones are like mountains; 
his hair is like plants; his arteries are like medicine, and his 
abdominal organs are like metals. 

His body consists of nine jewels built on nine circles inside 
one another. The outer circle encompasses the flesh, the bones, 
the muscles, the nerves, the brain, the skin and the nails. The 
brain fills the cavity of the bones. Its function is to maintain 
energy and flexibility of bones. The function of bones is to hold 
and stabilize the flesh around them. The function of the muscles 
is to tie up joints and move organs. The function of the flesh is 
to seal the defects in the body and protect the bones from 
fracturing and dislocation. The function of arteries is to deliver 
blood to various parts of the body. The function of the blood is 
to regulate the temperature of the body, maintain life, adjust 
temperament and generate motion. The function of the skin is to 
guide the extremities, hold them and bundle them to protect 
them from splitting and scattering. 

The body has twelve holes equivalent to the number of 
constellations. Since there are six northern constellations and six 
southern constellations, there are six holes in the body on the 
left side and six on the right side similar to the arrangement of 
the constellations qualitatively and quantitatively. Also, the 
seven moving planets which control the laws of the celestial 
bodies affecting and regulating all beings, are similar to the 
human body which has seven influential forces stemming from 
the human mind to promote the well-being of the body. 
Additionally, these planets, which have spirits, bodies and souls 
acting upon and influencing metals, animals and plants, are 


52 


^Ghayat Al-Hakim}]*- 


similar to the human body which possesses physical forces to 
help maintain and promote the well-being of the body through 
seven other spiritual forces. These seven spiritual forces are: the 
holder, the puller, the digester, the pusher, the nourisher, the 
grower and the portrayer. There are seven other spiritual forces 
similar to the seven planetary spirits. These are the sensory 
forces by which a human being becomes complete and his 
actions become adequate, similar to the seven planets which 
decorate and establish the foundation of the celestial sphere by 
which they maintain the world and uphold its laws. These are 
the forces of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, feeling, speaking 
and reasoning. These five forces are like those of the five 
planets, two of which are similar to the © and the “5. The D 
derives its light from the O in its 28 houses. Similarly, the 
speaking force derives the meaning of beings from the 
reasoning force and communicates it by the 28 alphabets of the 
lexicon. Since there are two nodes in the celestial sphere, the 
head and the tail, both of which have their true entities and 
their visible actions and effects, likewise there are two elements 
in the human being that are similar, the good and the bad 
temper. Moreover, when the human spirit, is inclined towards 
its world, it will perform well; it will get rid of the annoyance of 
nature and it will be guided. However, if it is inclined towards 
nature, it will be disturbed in its action, move beyond its cause 
and it will be eclipsed in the same manner the O and the D are 
eclipsed by the node of the tail. Similar to this is the case of the 
bad temper, which is comparable to tough actions which cause 
destruction to the human body. Good temper, on the other 
hand, leads to good speech and when the make-up of the body 
is sound and functions naturally, the spirit will be clear and it 
will be enlightened by the mind. 

Whereas the O and the D are the lamps of the celestial 
sphere, the eyes are the lamps of the body by which the 
speaking spirit can recognize the pictures of beings and their 


53 


•«§{Picatrix}> 


colors and it can see things by the reflection of the sunlight and 
moonlight on them, as do the rest of the animals. Additionally, 
similar to the celestial sphere and its constellations which have 
parameters, phases and angles, so do the joints of the body, its 
organs and its various arteries. Also, like the total force of the 
seven planets and the twelve constellations from which forces 
are constantly spreading throughout the world every moment, 
minute, hour and with every movement of time, so does the 
spirit of man as it induces his body and joints to perform certain 
actions with every move he makes, with every moment and 
with every breath of his lifetime. Yet, he exists as a whole, a 
body and a spirit, until his spirit leaves him. Similarly, the total 
spirit is connected to partial spirits for an ordained duration 
and with a wise management. 

One of the miracles of man is that he is civilized by nature so 
that he can administer himself, his household, his servants, his 
family, as well as his kingdom. A word may please him to the 
extent of making him step down and a word may enrage him to 
the extent of fighting and taking risks. He wears expensive 
garments, gets treatment and takes medications to adjust his 
temper and improve himself. He shows friendship, conceals 
enmity and fraternizes with his enemy. He is sinking in air and 
permanently landing on earth. 

This is the characteristic of the partial but tangible human 
who is perishable in part, but not as a whole because he only 
became a partial human by external accidental effects, changes 
and colors which he was exposed to, and as such, he is 
perishable. However, the human of reason, as a whole, is locked 
into permanent existence both partially and totally. This is 
analogous to the Elements which are perishable in part but not 
as a whole. For instance, if water changes, it becomes fire, then 
air, and then it spoils and reverts to its natural state. It spoils 
from external effects, but it survives by nature, and so does the 
partial human; he is spoiled by dissolution, but he reverts to his 


54 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


totality. Accordingly, the whole human exists by reason and not 
by sensory perception. Thus, the essence of the reasonable part 
does not change or transform to another form. In fact, 
transformation is adjoining it in order to achieve perfect sensory 
perception. 

I am giving you examples to make this subject easy to 
understand because it may seem peculiar to the mind. The 
singular part of the Elements gains its partial Elemental status 
only by virtue of the arrangement of each in its position and by 
whatever internal accidental effects, which it may be subjected 
to, that pertains to its particular characteristics in this state. 
Water, for example, gains its wet and cool nature by its position 
and whatever adjoins it in the world order. However, its 
existence prior to its Element status survives as a whole. These 
totalities exist by nature whether perceived mentally and 
discovered by man or not. Existence to it is subjective and so is 
the whole human; his existence is also subjective. The evidence 
on the truth of what I have said is that there is fire in water and 
water in fire and that the Elements are intertwined and 
transform from one to another. Without this transformation, 
none of their characteristics could have existed. 

Similar to that is the attachment of the human being's 
willingness and volition to the first willingness and volition 
which are influenced and affected by other beings, although that 
may not be recognized by the partial human being. That is 
because this human whose will and volition may not be 
enforced in every situation and behavior, will find that they 
may be enforced in some, although he will not realize their 
influence on the whole. Only those who attain and experience 
theoretical arts can realize this. 

I would like you to know that if a human is able to find fire 
stripped of the accidentally acquired characteristics, the variable 
situations and whatever affects it when it joins its sisters, he 
would find it incapable of burning. That is because its share of 


55 


-^{Picatrix}> 


the partial function is acquired from its accidental 
characteristics, variable situations and position. Don't you see 
that if fire is accidentally displaced and departs from the body 
and wood, it will return to its nature and to its place above air. 
As for its simple total function, it is too great to be described or 
realized by words because it is an exceptionally great force 
which is above simplicity and above qualification and so are the 
rest of the Elements. 

The human being follows the same path. This is the human 
being who is eternally committed and around whom the 
complex human being is evolving. His intermingling and 
mixing with other things which accidentally adjoin him in 
different situations and positions, and from which he cannot 
detach himself, changes his image, transforms him and grants 
him common characteristics with animals, plants and other 
Elements. Consequently, he becomes similar to them in all 
aspects and when he recognizes this and follows the path that 
leads him to the enlightenment of the first principle. This is a 
system particular to his essence as well as to his own principle, 
he will be more of a human being than others inasmuch as he 
becomes detached. He can do that by applying virtues as much 
as possible and when he accomplishes that, he becomes the 
partial, sensitively perceptive, physical and robust human 
being, who is composed of two sub-parts, the mind and the 
spirit, in addition to the body. This joint perishable image in this 
lower world is a shell for the whole, mental, spiritual, 
honorable, kind, simple and primordial human being. It is the 
pure image which is not engulfed by a body; it is ever-lasting in 
the higher world. 

The image of the whole human is within his partial image 
and a simple and primordial form of it. The image of the partial 
human is inside the body and a simple form of it. The image of 
the body is a complex idol and a complex shell for the partial 
human. The image of the partial human being is a complex idol 


56 


•^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


and a complex shell for the whole human. The image of the 
whole human is an idol and a shell for the whole spirit and the 
whole spirit is an idol and a shell for the mind. The whole mind 
is an idol and a shell for the light from which the mind evolved. 
The light is the primordial source of the whole mind. Similarly, 
what is below that, which is higher, is simple and primordial to 
that which is below it and in addition to it and what is below 
that is always a complex image for what is above it and in 
addition to it. In fact, the human being is the complex image 
which uses the other bodies of nature. 

He, who wants to gain the truth of this knowledge, ought to 
be virtuous, pure in his mind and body from all sins and then 
he will see it and observe it in its reality. 

We did not, by presenting this subject, may Allah help you, 
deviate from our objective. In fact, this is the objective of this 
book because it is the principle for the science of talismans. If 
you have any experience in this field, you will realize this and 
acknowledge that it is obviously magic. Plato, the virtuous and 
an authority in this science, deals with this subject in his book, 
Timaeus, and elaborates a great deal on images and he explains 
this sought objective. However, he makes the conclusion vague 
like other philosophers who act in the same manner to protect 
their wisdom from uninformed people as did Proclus. 

To them vagueness is the ambiguity of meaning so that 
whoever wants to clear up this ambiguity must do that with 
reflection, deliberation and thorough examination in order to 
distinguish it from whatever it has been mixed with from the 
obvious matters. Of these arts there are two kinds: the obvious 
and the concealed. The concealed art is that which needs 
analogy and introductions so that it becomes clear to you or that 
can be achieved by observation, reasoning, reflection and 
deliberation. 

Reasoning can be attained in many ways, some of which are 
relating the present to the past or the part to the source by a 


57 




•»2{Picatrix}> 


common meaning. It can also be attained by analyzing it in view 
of what was explained by one or more with credentials whereby 
they can deduce a meaning similar to the sought one. In general, 
whoever likes to follow this method must direct his full 
attention and observations towards this method, and with this, 
he can find the meaning of beings and discover their ranks. 



58 



^{Chapter Seven^** 


Y OU MAY KNOW, ALLAH BLESS YOU, that beings 
have ranks. The High Being of creation is the noblest, 
most distinguished and the most perfect rank. Next to 
that in rank is the mind, the spirit and then the 
primordial all of which is not moving and cannot be described 
by a distance motion. Next to the primordial in rank is the orbit 
of nature which is initially a motion as well as a stillness from 
which being and corruption in this world evolved. Next to that 
is the orbit of the D. After this rank, there is a common matter 
which possesses sensory perception. This means that things 
exist in it by force and not by nature. Next to that are the 
Elements which interact in that common matter, since the 
Elements only interact in matter. Then next to the Elements are 
metals, then plants, then animals and then the speaking ones 
among them. This rank is different from the first rank because 
the first rank, the mind, is a noble rank that descends until it 
reaches the lowest rank, the rank of the orbit of the D. After it 
reaches the lowest level, it begins to ascend to the highest rank, 
the rank of speaking animals, because they possess wisdom and 
they act willfully, not by force. Be aware of that, O seeker of 
wisdom, and you will gain a great fortune and the ultimate 


59 



•^{Picatrix^- 


happiness. Do not be one of those addressed by Al-Mutanabbi 22 
who says, "I have not seen a worse shortcoming like the 
shortcoming of those who are capable of achieving excellence 
but fail to do so". 

The ranks of being have a certain order which I will explain 
to you to exercise your mind and enlighten your vision. So be 
with me, listen, and learn: the principle is first, then the element, 
then the Elemental, then the primordial, then the image, then the 
nature, then the body, then al-Nami (the growing), then the 
animal, then the human being, then the man, then the obscure, 
and then the known. The principle is more general than the 
element and its category because it does not conform to the 
essence or to the accidental characteristics; the element does not 
conform to the essence; the element is more general than the 
Elemental because the element is an essence without 
qualification, but if it accepts qualification, it becomes an 
Elemental. The Elemental is more general than the primordial 
because it is a particular essence which accepts qualification. 

The primordial is the collection of the Elementals because it 
accepts to have an image. The primordial is more general than 
the image because, before the primordial accepts to have an 
image, it is primitive, but if it accepts to have an image, then this 
image becomes similar to the image of the primordial copper as 
related to the image of a kettle, and as the primordial of wood as 
related to the image of a chair, and if it accepts motion, stillness, 
and accepts force to be mixed with it, it will be considered a 
nature. If the characteristics are combined and it accepts color, 
growth, or spirit, then it becomes a body. A body is either 
growing or not growing, and the growing is either an animal or 
not an animal. The animal is either a human being or not a 
human being, and the human being either a man or not a man. 


22 Diwan Al-Mutanabbi, Cairo 1308 n 373 


60 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


man. The man is either Zayd 23 or not Zayd, and Zayd is either 
obscure or not obscure. What is not obscure is known. 

The primordial, may Allah enlighten your vision, is the joint 
agreement of the Elements to accept an image. There are two 
types of primordial: a personal primordial which does not 
receive, except one image composed of the complex Elements, 
earth, water, fire, and air and does not transform from one state 
to another. The other is a whole primordial that accepts all 
images which are composed of the simple Elements: heat, 
coolness, dryness and wetness, and it does not transform from 
one state to another. Aristotle presents it well as he defines the 
primordial, with respect to its general aspects, as a force 
acceptable to various images. With respect to its characteristics, 
he defines it as a body that influences all entities. 

We presented these meanings to enrich the mind and 
sharpen the intellect. These meanings and the like are the 
spiritual talismans and the words of inspiration that Adam 
learned from his Lord. 24 Only knowledgeable people and those 
who triumph in getting in touch with the total reality can 
comprehend them. For the purpose of comprehending their 
meanings, we have presented this treatise. At this point, I 
would like to conclude this treatise and move along to what we 
have promised you in the introduction of this book. I beseech 
Allah's help in achieving what we hope and intend to 
accomplish. 


23 Abd-ar Rahman Abu Zayd ibn Muhammad ibn Khaldun who penned theMuqaddimah in 
1381, used his own name of Zayd objectively to illustrate a point in the text. Perhaps Zayd is 
a common name used for such examples, or the author of Picatrix may possess it as his own. 

24 Sura 2, 37 


61 





Book II 



THIS BOOK DEALS WITH THE CELESTIAL IMAGES, THE EXPOSURE OF ITS 
SECRETS WHICH HAVE BEEN CONCEALED BY PHILOSOPHERS, AND 
SAMPLES OF HOW TO BORROW MAGIC IN THIS SO-CALLED WORLD OF 
BEING AND CORRUPTION FROM THE MAGICIAN OF THE ETHER WHO 
SPREADS SPIRITUAL FORCES. 






^{Chapter One}2* 


T HE INTELLECTUALS, MAY ALLAH BLESS YOU, are 
still aspiring to know the secrets of the philosophers 
and what they mean by using symbols and enigmas in 
their books through which they achieved their 
objectives and goals. Is it possible for those with inferior 
intelligence to achieve their goal, may Allah enlighten our 
minds? 

What motivated me to look for the secrets of talismans when 
I was in the prime of youth is what I read in a book entitled The 
Fruit by the honorable Ptolemy, in which he says that the 
images in the world of creation are obedient to the celestial 
images. There is consensus among philosophers that planets 
possess forces by virtue of their natural disposition which they 
accepted willfully. Accordingly, the talisman-makers drew their 
images at the time when certain planets reach their house. This 
situation helps them achieve the planned effects of their works. 
They did very well in designing their secrets to fulfill their 
wishes. I decided to include in this chapter an excerpt which 
was written by Ahmad Ben Yusuf al-Katib and published in 
Egypt in The Biography of Ahmad Ben Tolone and His Son 
Khamarawayh by a Roman philosopher who lived there at that 
time. I would like to cite an excerpt of the text from what he 


65 





•»S{Picatrix}> 


■^(Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


wrote because I do not wish to burden the intellectual with the 
full text. This is what he wrote: 

"As I was at his place one day, we heard screaming at the 
side of the house, and when he was asked about it, he said, 'A 
boy was bitten by a Scorpion.' So, he brought a piece of cloth 
with tablets of some substance in it that smelled like kundur 25 . 
He took one of those tablets, had it crushed, and made the boy 
drink it all. Subsequently, the boy stopped screaming and he 
was quickly cured from his ailment as soon as he drank the 
powder. I looked at the tablets and saw a picture of a Scorpion. 
So I asked him who stamped these tablets. He showed me a 
golden ring with the' stone Bezoar in it. Then I asked him about 
the secret of the ring and how it is made. He indicated that 
when the D enters HU while nu is one of the poles of the 
ascendant, a small amount of kundur is stamped when the “5 is 
in its first phase. I made the ring in this manner and I stamp 
bitten persons with it to cure them. However, I change the 
substance I use for stamping patients so that kundur does not 
become the only substance used for this purpose. I saw the 
miraculous results of what he did. At this point his account 
ended." 

Since I was good at carving in my youth, I entrusted some of 
the applied philosophers as well as other philosophers to 
participate with me in observing this arrangement. Accordingly, 
I carved the picture in the specified time and examined this 
talisman. I discovered through several trials its miraculous 
effects. All those who tried it were very amazed. 

This was my motive in pursuing the research in this sensory 
science; I felt it because sensing is the feeling of the mind, and 
the limits of this feeling cannot be determined unless sensing is 
understood, which can be achieved by understanding the 
change of how the senses react when the sensed objects 


25 

Glue extracted from a tree with thorny leaves. 


encounter them directly. Sensing is the feeling of those sensitive 
forces towards the changes in how the senses react. For 
instance, the medium of the force of seeing is the eye. This force 
is derived from the fluid medium of the pupil of the eyes and so 
are the rest of the senses. Sensing is the feeling of these forces 
and achieving knowledge through them. 

Proof is the philosophic criterion which leads to perfection 
for whoever seeks a real objective. A branch of knowledge can 
exist by examining the particular characteristics of that objective 
as well as through examining its subjective fixed introductions. 
There are two branches of knowledge: knowledge by belief and 
knowledge by perception. Knowledge can be also be achieved 
by accepted and convincing statements and in this case, proof is 
termed as persuasive. 

I first read about this proof in the works of Ptolemy and then 
I discovered by practice the effect of this talisman which I have 
already described in the First Book. Whenever I researched a 
certain topic in books written by the wise, I always found what I 
wanted and I was happy to discover the truth. 

Going back to our objective, I would like to say that no one 
can find out how the higher world affects the lower world 
without having full knowledge of the different branches of 
philosophy, I mean the mathematical, physical and meta¬ 
physical arts. He who falls short in acquiring these sciences will 
not be able to fulfill his real goal because the primary 
perquisites of knowledge are taken from these three branches of 
philosophy. As for the mathematical art, without numbers, the 
movements of the higher bodies and the methods by which 
geometry is obtained cannot be learned. Furthermore, 
mathematical survey is a prerequisite for learning the geometry 
of the celestial bodies; without it, star observation or their 
measurements, which are primarily derived from the proofs of 
mathematical survey, will be impossible to learn. Moreover, the 
art of matching, by which similarity and difference can be 


66 


67 


-»§{Picatrix}> 


recognized, is necessary for learning the similarities between 
celestial and earthly bodies and which of the high bodies' 
behavior is similar to which of those on earth. How can anyone 
match between things that are similar if he does not command 
that knowledge? Additionally, he who is literate in the 
knowledge of nature, will be able to recognize the near causes 
for the world and corruption. He who does not know that, will 
not know that the high bodies affect the low bodies. Besides, he 
who has no knowledge of the art of metaphysics will not know 
which of the low beings are the resulting effect of the high 
beings and which of these beings are affected and which are 
not. It is essential for anyone who wants to learn this art well to 
know its primary prerequisites; however, these prerequisites 
are not, in fact, available except for philosophers. Deservedly, 
no one knows them except philosophers. 




^{Chapter Two^ 

T ALKING ABOUT IMAGES, may Allah bless you, is 
very difficult because the specialized people in this field 
exerted their utmost efforts to conceal it. However, I 
am revealing what they have concealed. He who wants 
to delve in this subject can refer to The Book of the Great Images, 
by Zosimos which deals with the art of astrology as illustrated 
by the Arabs in the Middle Ages. This book goes into detail in 
explaining this subject. The images, my brother, that appear in 
the constellations have two phases: the first are the 48 images 
that appear in the constellations; they are in the celestial sphere, 
and these are the imaginary images that are drawn by using the 
fixed stars as a reference. They find similarity between the 
convergence and diversion of planets on one hand and the 
images of the constellations and other images such as Canis, 
Ursa, Lyra, Cygnus and others, on the other hand. 

These images disappear and move from one constellation to 
another. This quality is not natural in astronomy, especially in 
the constellations' band, because it takes these images 
thousands of years to do so when they approach the aphelion; 
however, the images that are getting close or are already close 
to the aphelion do not appear to be moving in hundreds of 
thousands of years because the band gets very narrow. This is 



•♦^Picatrix}^ 


the first phase. As for the second phase, it is that of the 
imaginary images that was illustrated by the Indians who said, 
"A big, intrepid, proud man with red eyes wearing a loose 
white garment belted with a rope, looking grim and standing on 
guard on one leg appears in the first phase of HP. A woman 
with one leg wearing a red dress and rope, who has the body of 
a horse ready to take off, asking for clothes, jewelry, and 
children appears in the second phase. A black man with red hair 
and a grim look, wearing a wooden bracelet and holding a 
hanger with red garments hanging on it, wants to do good but 
unable to do that, appears in the third phase." 

Similar information can be said about the rest of the 
constellations. 

I would like you to know that these are delusive imaginings 
about the characteristics of stars, planets and constellations. 
However, the Indians associated the man in the first phase with 
red eyes and intrepidity with the house of c f and its face which 
delineates redness, rescue and intrepidity. As for the white 
loose garment, it is associated with the honor of the O and its 
light. Concerning his grimness, it is associated with the anger of 
o' in this house. Regarding his standing on one leg and standing 
on guard, it is associated with dominant tyrants. They 
substituted a woman for a man in the second phase in 
association with 9 because 9 has been associated with the 
feminine gender most of its life and it is within 2° from the 
domain of 9. The red garments are a semblance of the 
characteristics of o'. The fact that a part of the image is of a 
horse is a representation of the cavalier characteristics of o', 
which is a feature of the strength of riding animals by virtue of 
its proximity to Al-Sadis and to battle-riding animals. Asking 
for jewelry is an association with the O, the red dresses with the 
white sunlight, which is used as a veil for the O, children with 
the middle of the sky because it is the house of illumination and 
an indication on the beginning of the development of the fetus. 


70 


-»§{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


They referred to the third phase by a man with a reddish color 
in association with cf and ?, both of which have masculine 
gender and a reddish color, which is a mixture of two colors, 
the redness of o' and the lead color of 5. Red hair is associated 
with c f, grimness with a characteristic of cf which has as one of 
its features is holding a sword in his hand because the sword is 
a characteristic of cf, wood with 5, and so is iron, doing good 
and bad deeds with 9, preventing them by cf at the house and 
by $ with the edge. With these examples, you can understand 
every thing they symbolized, and what they wanted to lead to 
in this second phase. I have provided you, O seeker of wisdom, 
the criteria that you can use as a reference and you may act 
accordingly. 

Abu Bakr Ibn Wahsija deals with this subject in his book 
which he translated from the Nabateans. He entitled his book 
Tiqana, in which he talks about the triangles and the north and 
south images in the water triangle. Then he adds, "Whenever 
you see a male water, a male river, a male well, a male rivulet, 
or a water spring that can be either a male or a female, you will 
know that they are affecting water and water substances, as are 
the rest of the examples concerning the male of fire, earth and 
air". Be aware of that. This celestial band is the path of 
'Tumtum' as well as the path of male images of other star 
angles. 

The ancient philosophers perceived the names of 
constellations, their shapes and positions, as symbols of their 
action. For instance, when they talk about a detached head that 
talks and a paralyzed or amputated hand and other such 
images, smiling and weeping, and signals from some stars to 
others, there are speaking of symbols for identifying their 
actions and the miraculous actions and effects. They built the art 
of talismans on this basis. 

As for sleeping, it is the information of the absent situation 
veiled by time. However, death is the information of distant 


71 



•»S{Picatrix}3«- 


transcendental things that existed in the past and are being 
brought out. Nonetheless, if these are some of the signs that 
describe the deceased, which means they are telling what is 
going to take place forever. Some of these examples are 
presented by the Sufi, Jabir Ibn Hayyam, in his book entitled 
Explaining the Images of Constellations and Their Actions. In his 
book, he listed all stars in the straight band and the action of 
every one of them. By this, he compensated for what Aristotle 
wrote in his book entitled Astrologia. This book as well as his 
book The Plants, were burned and no traces were found. 

Hermes states in his book entitled The Composition of Moving 
Images in Space that the useful actions of stars are too many to be 
specified. He states that every star has a certain action in each 
degree of its path if it reaches a tangential point of that degree 
or if it was within it. The total of these actions are 360 x 7 which 
is equal to 2,520. These images produce artistic actions and 
effects, and if you multiply 360 x 6 the product will resemble the 
number of times in which every two planets converge in one 
degree. The reason for multiplying by 6 is because this is the 
possible number of convergence of each two planets; 5 and Z 
may meet in one degree, and that is one, 5 with o', and that is 
two, 5 and the O, and that is three, 5 and 9, and that is four, 5 
and 9, and that is five, 5 and the D, and that is six. When you 
multiply 6 x 360, the total number of degrees of that circle, the 
product will be 2,160 images. These images produce miraculous 
actions and effects. Then you multiply 360 x 5 the product of 
which will be 1,800 and that indicates the number of times each 
three planets converge in one degree. These images produce 
miraculous actions and effects. Afterwards, you multiply 360 x 
4, which is the number of the times every four planets meet in 
one degree, the product will be 1,440. These images also have 
actions and effects. Then multiply 360 x 3, which denotes the 
number of times each five planets meet on one degree and the 
product will be 1,080. These images produce actions and effects 


72 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim^- 


as well. Then you multiply 360 x 2, which is the number of times 
each six planets meet in one degree, and the product will be 720. 
These images also produce actions and effects. Then you 
multiply 360 x 1, which is the number of times each seven 
planets meet in one degree. The First Wise explains that the total 
number of images which depict the controlling principle of 
degrees is 10,006 images, all of which produce miraculous 
actions and effects. 

Additionally, The First Wise states, "You need to do that 
when you have one planet in one degree and the rest of the 
other planets in the next degree, and then you divide that 
among the seven planets and let all planets be positioned within 
the 2 °. You keep doing that in the 360 ° of the celestial sphere. 
This is longer than the first and more artistic. 

So, what is your opinion, O you who desire to have a 
thorough knowledge of the essence of the actions of these 
images and their effects on this world! When you get through 
all of that, you may go back to the above seven moving planets 
as they converge in their degrees separately with the fixed 
planets or in combination with them; by combination I mean the 
joining of the moving planets to the fixed. I would like you to 
know that and beware of it; withhold this knowledge and do 
not reveal its secrets to anyone who is not up to its standards 
because by doing that you will do injustice to yourself as well as 
to him. 


73 




-^Chapter Three^* 


A GROUP OF PEOPLE BELIEVED that the action of 
planets is nothing but an increase or decrease in 
temperature because they were not informed about 
these excellent effects and concealed arts. They 
thought that all actions are produced by the O and the 15, and 
the function of the other planets is only to strengthen their 
actions. They also believed that the movement of the rest of the 
planets within the entire degrees are determined and controlled 
by the movement of the O and the situations of the O decide the 
situations of all bom children. Moreover, they agreed that the 
situations of the D determine the condition of its effects. The 
first situation is when it moves away and separates from the O 
and reaches the lunar quarter. At this position, the D will be 
more effective in moving more moisture and humid hot 
weather and less hot weather and consequently, it will have an 
effect on producing better and healthier plants as well as 
everything else that grows on the ground. In the second 
situation, when the D is receiving the O and consequently 
becomes a full D with complete illumination, it moves heat and 
temperature equally. Therefore, its effect on producing better 
and healthier plants will be greater. Additionally, moving heat 
and humidity will have a more remarkable effect on the bodies 
of animals, various parts of plants, as well as metals. As it 


75 


->8{Picatrix}0<- 


moves from full “5 to half “3, it moves a little less humidity and a 
little more heat. Consequently, it makes the bodies of animals, 
plants and metals increase in quantity, improve in quality, and 
it also affects them to become more open, widespread and 
expanded; however, expansion by heat will be greater than by 
humidity. From the phase of half “3, until its completely 
exposed by the sunlight, its effect on moving heat will be 
extremely small, smaller than its effect in any of its above three 
phases. It was stated in this regard that it dries a little and cools 
a lot because its moves less moisture. That is why we say that it 
is more likely that it brings a very cold temperature in this 
quarter and causes little dryness. 

When it meets with the O in one degree, which is its fifth 
phase, the Chaldeans consider it to be its best and most effective 
situation, whereas the Indians believe that it is its worst and 
weakest in its effect. As for the Chinese, they believe that in this 
phase, the 3's strength will depend on the constellation in 
which it meets with the O. The Greeks and the Egyptians think 
that the meeting of the D with the O gives it more strength as 
we said before, but they disagree with us on considering this 
phase its best. They believe that its best situation is when it is 
fully illuminated, and thus when it converges with the O, it only 
becomes stronger; nonetheless, it is its best and most effective 
situation. 

There is a consensus among our ancient generations that the 
best situation of the 3, regarding its phases and its distance 
from the O, is that when it meets with the O in one minute. This 
is the fifth situation which has different characteristics than the 
previous five. This is the loftiest situation and the most effective 
in its actions because it rejoices when it meets the O the same 
way a traveler rejoices when he goes back to his home. At this 
phase, it produces actions although it might have produced 
parts of them in the previous situations, but in this situation, it 
completes what it was missing and adds to it. They also believe 


*»S(Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 

that it is capable of producing actions similar to those produced 
by the O and that is a great achievement and an honorable 
status. Furthermore, they believe that the "3 can, at this 
situation, produce particular effects in complex bodies. It 
should not be understood here that this is our version of 
producing particular effects or otherwise because these actions 
are produced only by the O, and what the “3 does is expose their 
effects, bringing them out of their hiding and illuminating them 
after they had been extinguished. We say with certainty that it 
does not produce actions; it only brings them out of their 
concealment. The O is responsible for bringing all things from 
non-existence to being. 

The five above-described situations of the “3 as determined 
by its relationship to the O may be similar to the situation of 
animals, plants and metals. Accordingly, the "3's situation as 
determined by its relationship to the O may be similar to 
situation of animals in all ages, in their youth as well as in their 
old age. Similarly, the T>'s situation may also be similar to the 
four seasons of the year, to the four directions called the angles 
of the world: the East, the West, the right and the left. Four 
winds may blow from these four directions. Moreover, the 
various four in the human body may be similar to the above 
groups of four. 

Although the origin of these meanings and phases is from 
the planets including the O and the “3, they accept from the 
power of the planet movements, by virtue of their own 
movements and being at this image, things that emanate to 
them after acquiring their images, whereby they will have 
situations which require images different from their initial 
images. Since this is the case, all complex bodies, which are 
similar to planets, may be constantly changing in response to 
the powers of the planetary movements. These partial changes 
are called the continuous partial changes which we mentioned 
previously. They are the pillars of things and their origins. They 




■»^Picatrix}> 


are called the constant total changes which do not vanish or 
transform because if they do transform, the images of these 
things will all be impaired since they are the constant total. 

As a result of what we have explained, all situations of 
things from their beginning to their end are similar to the 
situations of the T> as they are determined by its relationship to 
the O. This accidental cause, which not only belongs to forms 
but to all planets as well as to all complex bodies, is from the 
stars and in particular from the D as well as from the planets in 
general. Those ensuing tragedies are the result of the eclipse of 
the "5 and planets. 

These things accept from the O, the D and planets constant 
change. Thus, they accept rightness for themselves from right 
situations and wrongs from wrong situations. The eclipse of the 
O and the D is an accidental event which is similar to abnormal 
complex bodies. No one believes that the O and the D have any 
mischief in themselves, neither accidental nor intrinsic. What we 
mean by calling these tragedies celestial is that the reason for 
their occurrence and the occurrence of all other tragedies that 
affect animals, plants, other complex bodies and other four 
elements is the eclipse of the "5 and planets. 

Going back to our subject, we say that it is a necessity to look 
into the position of the D for every action. It is the most useful 
thing in knowing the outlook and the true information and the 
best indicator of what is happening in the world of being and 
corruption. It is the most specialized, among all other things, in 
its management. Its safety from an-nuhus (the start of 
misfortune) and its distant position from the burning way 
should be considered when starting an action desiring a good 
outcome and complete usefulness. The duration and soundness 
of this action will depend on the speed of the movement and 
what its indications are. However, if it was in contact with an- 
nuhus and declining to the south, or if it is in at the end of the 
constellations or in their first degree but did not complete it. 



-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


then this is bad. Nonetheless, it should not be looked at if it is 
declining or vacant of the master of its house, or dropping from 
the pole, or with the Tail of the Dragon because starting an 
action in this case will not be warranted unless the planet from 
which the “5 moves away and the planet with which the D 
converges are in one pole, or what comes next to the pole, or 
dropping. Because if the D is dropping, there will be no good in 
it except when it is in the third position of the ascendant and the 
master of its house is dropping. If you find the master of the 
house of the “5 in the ascending pole or in the middle of the sky, 
Al-Hadi Ashar, or in Al-Khamis, and if it was moving eastward 
in a straight line, then this situation will be favorable to the 
endeavor you undertake. This is similar to the favorable 
relationship of 9 to women and happiness, Z to sects, religions, 
and males, 9 to writing and correspondence, the O to authority 
and leadership and the D to education and messengers. 

Whenever you plan to undertake an action, you ought to 
look at the O and the D and their honorable companions and at 
their domain and then look at the middle of the sky. If you find 
them both clear of al-nuhus in these positions and you find their 
companions, I mean the companions of honor or the master of 
the ascendant in a favorable position, then starting action in this 
case will be recommended, complete and better. This is 
especially true when al-su'ud 26 are in azimuth with the 
illuminating planets and the ascendant is easterly, because 
eastward movement of planets indicates overcoming, victory, 
completion and expedient achievement of wishes, while 
westerly planets, although they may be in a pole, indicate 
slowness, languor and prolonging. 

If you find the ”5) in a favorable position while its master is 
dropping, then the commencement of an action will be good 
although the outcome will be bad, and if you find both the D 


26 


'Su'ud is the plural of sa'ad. 



•»2{Picatrix}> 


and its master dropping, then you know that the action 
beginning and end will be bad. If the D and its master are in 
favorable positions, then the action will be as good and 
complete as planned by its doer especially if the master of the 
ascendant is a sa'ad and it is in the pole. However, if it is a nahs 
and its position is favorable, then the best thing to do in this 
situation is to have 2 and 9 in the ascendant or looking at the 
ascendant. This will produce a complete, favorable, expeditious, 
and blessed result, especially if this is done when the D is 
converging with the sa'ad and that sa'ad is full and not 
retreating. This will be suitable for every action except releasing 
a slave from his master and taking what does not belong to him. 

The D is the foremost planet in managing whatever is below 
it from the world of being and corruption. Therefore, you 
should look first at its sa'ad or nahs, and then identify the 
increase in its beginning, since it gets more powerful as it moves 
away from the O, and then it changes as it reaches its sixth, 
fourth and third phases as well as when it is facing the O. Its 
influence will be equivalent to the influence of the planets which 
it converges with at that time, while, at the same time, it is in 
good standing at its fourth, third and sixth phases, as well as 
when it is facing the O. If you detect that the “S is getting 
increasingly bright and more powerful, this will be an 
indication that this is the best occasion for achieving an increase 
in whatever you would like to achieve. However, if its 
brightness is decreasing, then this is the best time to achieve a 
decrease in whatever you want to accomplish. If the D separates 
from the O until it reaches the left fourth phase, this is favorable 
for claiming a right. It will be a favorable position for 
undertaking selling, purchasing, quarrels, debate and counter 
argument when the D moves away from the O's left fourth 
phase and becomes in full view of the O. But between facing the 
O and its right fourth phase will be favorable for the unjustly 
treated in a conflict as well as for debt and when it converges 



-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


with the O, it becomes favorable for applying education and 
claiming a right. 

You should know that the best planet's su'ud is when there 
is a sa'ad in the constellation in which the planet is a part of 
and, at the same time, there is a sa'ad in the next constellation. 
You should also know, Allah bless you, that the turned up-side- 
down constellations are favorable for triumph and coercion. T* 
and and constellations of dual bodies are especially favorable 
for making talismans and tricks. As for the fixed constellations, 
they are favorable for influential people and making talismans 
for constant actions. Thus, if you intend to produce silver or 
gold chemically or do anything which connects the spirituality 
of the D and the ascendant with a fixed constellation and with a 
dual-body planet, and if you want to start an action that you 
like to repeat on a daily basis, you need to let the ascendant be a 
dual-body constellation and to let the D in an up-side-down 
constellation looking at the ascendant. When you want to have 
an action with a lasting potential and constancy, let that 
ascendant be a fixed constellation or with a dual-body 
constellation, and, at the same time, let the D be in a fixed 
constellation connected to the master of its house either in the 
third or sixth phase provided that the master of its house is 
clear of nuhus, burning and retreat. If this is impossible, let the 
D be connected to the su'ud while that particular sa'ad is 
looking at the master of the ascendant in a third or sixth phase. 
Avoid their facing each other and the fourth phase since the 
strongest effect takes place when the su'ud are looking from the 
third or the sixth phase, and the weakest when they are looking 
from the fourth phase or when they are facing each other. The 
weakest will be when the nuhus are looking from the third or 
sixth phase and the strongest when they are looking from the 
fourth phase or when they are meeting each other. If the D is 
accidentally connected to the master of its house which was a 
nahs, then this situation will be favorable in fulfilling needs and 



-*£{Picatrix}3«- 


all sought effects; however, if it is a sa'ad and looking at the 
ascendant, that will be better and more efficient. Avoid all 
actions when the D is with the Tail and looking at the nuhus 
from the fourth phase, as well as when they are facing each 
other, or separating from each another. Additionally, you 
should avoid all actions when the TVs qualities are decreased 
because this indicates difficult, tiresome and prolonged action. 
Hardship is proportionate to the decrease in one or more of the 
attributes of the T), especially if this decrease is in one of the 
three qualities: light, motion and calculation. Its best situation is 
when its light is brighter and out of sight of o' because if o' is 
looking at the T) when its light is brighter, this will add a great 
deal of nahs to the D and the same thing happens when 5 is 
looking at the T) when its light is less bright. The T) is strongest 
at night when it is above the Earth, while the ascendant is 
strongest on daytime when the T) is below the Earth. You 
should also know that the best choice is when the T) and the 
ascendant are in a straight-ascendant constellation. This 
situation indicates expeditious fulfillment of a need and success, 
especially if they are in fixed or in dual-body constellations. 

You may know that HT is the fastest constellation in turning 
up-side down, and 69 is the most unsteady; % is the fastest in 
motion, and Q is the strongest and the most balanced. You may 
also know that the poles are faster in completing actions than 
others and what comes after the poles are slower and then the 
dropping poles are slow and signals of failure. The fastest 
completion of an action is accomplished when there is a sa'ad in 
the ascendant, or when the D is moving in a straight path. Be 
aware that the outcome of an action can be detected from the 
master of the third phase of the D, from the master of the 
ascendant, in accordance with their positions and situations, as 
well as when the planets are looking at them. You may follow 
these examples in order to predetermine what the outcome will 
be. 


82 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}^ 


Dorotheus, the pioneer of establishing the rules for starting 
actions, advises to have the ascendant and its master and the T) 
and the master of its house in good standing and to avoid, as 
much as you can, having the T) in one of the ten bad phases at 
the start of an action and not to let it disappear from the 
ascendant, especially when the master of the ascendant or the 
master of the D are two nahses opposing and competing with 
the D from a pole. Let the D be in the ascendant pole. Do not 
drop the arrow of happiness at the beginning of actions or 
matters related to opposing the D or competing with it. Also, do 
not pay any attention to the master of the arrow or whether the 
arrow is dropping into the ascendant if the arrow is looking at 
the ascendant and the D. Be careful to let the master of the 
ascendant be with the arrow. This is safer and better. Do not at 
all let the T) be in the third, sixth, eighth or twelfth phase of the 
arrow. This is abhorred. Let the beginning of the master of the 
ascendant and the T) be always in the straight ascending 
constellations. You may also know that the ascendant and the 
fourth and its master denote the beginnings in general. 
However, if you see the D in a bad situation or something 
comes up that has to be done and you cannot delay, drop the T) 
from the ascendant and do not let the ascendant have any part 
of the T); make the ascendant a sa'ad and strengthen the 
ascendant and its master. Thus is Dorotheus’ statement. 

Going back to our subject, we would like to add that 
improving the ascendant and its master should be in quality 
form and happiness. By form, we mean that the ascendant 
should have similar meaning and quality to the meaning and 
quality of the need. By quality, we relate such matters as things 
to be completed quickly, fast motion, authority and strength to 
the fiery constellations. By meaning, we relate such matters as 
wars to cf’s constellations and we have the need, the master of 
the need and the master's master of the need in suitable 
positions. The position of the need indicates the beginning of 


83 



•»S{Picatrix}> 


what is in this need; the master of the need refers to the middle 
of the need, and the master's master of the need points out to 
the outcome of the need. Moreover, the ascendant indicates the 
beginning of the situation of the person asking for the need; the 
master of the ascendant indicates the middle and the master's 
master of the ascendant indicates the end. You can refer the 
arrow of the need to the status of the need, to its master and to 
its master's master. Improve all these with what I have 
described above: bring to them the su'ud which have been 
produced for them, looking and by friendly connections; drop 
the nuhus from these positions and beware of the return of the 
master of the ascendant or the master of the need, because this 
indicates the worst, prevention and prolonging. If all positions 
and situations point to the being, this will be preceded by 
despair and prevention by preventive measures and actions. 
The result will be achieved but with difficulty. Avoid having the 
Tail face or converge with either the D or the O or in any other 
arrangement; that is they should not be in a converging or 
facing situation, but in the ascendant, in the position of the need 
or in the arrow of the need. This will spoil the outcome with 
disgrace and difficulty. Be sure that the su'ud are placed in the 
ascendant and the positions of the need or in the poles. As for 
the major sa'ad, it is powerful in every matter in which you seek 
Allah's protection. Regarding the minor sa’ad, it is powerful in 
entertainment, sensual pleasure, women, make-up and so forth. 
Avoid having the D in the ascendant in any matter because it is 
opposing it and hostile to it. However, the O does not oppose 
the ascendant, but it uncovers matters, propagates them and 
divides the society. 

Be certain that there are no nuhus in the ascendant and the 
poles especially if they were the masters of the bad positions. If 
the nahs is the master of al-Thamin, it indicates death, 
opposition and imprisonment. If it is the master of al-Sadis, it 
indicates enemies, slaves, illnesses, theft, small prisons and 



-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


four-legged animals. If it is the master of al-Thani-ashar, it 
denotes a disaster caused by money, assistants, food and water. 
The benefit of what I am telling you is very important in the 
science of talismans. Beware and take extreme caution not to let 
the ascendant be a daytime ascendant in a daytime constella¬ 
tion or a night-time ascendant in a night-time constellation. 
Additionally, it should be ascending in a straight line. The same 
applies to the O and the D if you can arrange that. The masters 
should be strong to obtain a combined force. Know the planets 
and what they indicate and this will help you achieve the 
purpose in this regard. Whenever you like to acquire friendship, 
companionship, or association, let the D be accepted by 9 in the 
third phase, or better yet in the house of honor. 

You should know that the third phase is a figure of three 
equal sides. Each side consists of 120 parts circumscribed by the 
celestial body bands. The hexagonal form is composed of six 
equal sides. Each side is made of 60 parts surrounded by the 
celestial body orbits. The quadrangular form is a four-sided 
figure and each side comprises 90 parts bordered by the 
celestial body bands. Facing is equivalent to the second 
quadrangular phase. 27 

Going back to our topic, we would like to say that if 9 is not 
accepting, let it be in the third phase of the D while the D is 
being accepted by Z or by the master of its house regardless of 
whether it is in the third or sixth phase or converging with 
them. If that was not possible, let the D have some of 9's good 
luck, the su'ud of Z and clear of nuhus, and if that is only for 
friendship and companionship, let the ascendant be in be in the 
good fortune of 9. However, if friendship is for an interest in 
real estate, the ascendant should be in al-Rabi. If you desire to 
benefit from credit, let it be in Al-Tasi. If you hope to fulfill a 


27 


An obvious description of astrological aspects known as Trine, Sextiie and Square. 


84 


85 



-»^{Picatrix}> 


wish, let it be in al-Hadi-Ashar and simultaneously make the 
arrow of happiness and its master derive their good fortune 
willingly from a strong position. If friendship and 
companionship are desired for war-related matters, let o' accept 
and assist the master of the ascendant or the D as a gesture of 
friendship. If you want to obtain a loan, let the acceptance be 
from 5 instead of O'. If it is for writers, accountants or scholars, 
let acceptance be from 9. If it is for the great king, let acceptance 
be from the O. If for judges and religious and noble people, let 
acceptance be from Z. 

Likewise, if it is from a seeker of a meaning of something, let 
acceptance be from its master - I mean the acceptance of the D 
of the ascendant, the arrow of happiness and from the arrow of 
wealth. Additionally, let the master of the "5 be restored, as we 
mentioned above, and let the master of the ascendant and the 
master of al-Rabi' be clear from nuhus. Power is an indicator of 
the outcome. 

If you want to fulfill a need, let the master of the ascendant 
and the D be accepted by the master of the need or the one 
which is controlling it. Also let the D or the master of the 
ascendant be in the position of the need. If the need is from a 
sheikh or a landlord, let the master of the need be 5. If it is from 
a judge, a religious and generous person or honorable person or 
from a minister, let the master of the need be Z. If it is from an 
army or from a person who deals with fire and iron, let the 
master of the need be o'. If it is from a king or a sultan, let its 
master be the O. If from a woman, an entertainment operator, a 
make-up professional or from the makers of perfume, make-up 
products, tattoos and silk brocades, let the master of the need be 
$. If the need is from an accountant, a writer, a person of 
wisdom and tricks, a merchant or from a vocational person with 
good public relations, let the master of the need be 9. If the need 
is from a courier, a messenger, the king's servants, a sly person 
or a spy, let the master of the need be the T>. Bring sa'ad the 


86 


^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


master of the ascendant and the D with every need and let them 
be in an upside down position. If the need is for money, 
improve the arrow of happiness by meeting with its master and 
the master of the need. Also, let it be in sight of the T>. 
Moreover, ameliorate the master of al-Rabi' with su'ud and 
acceptance. Be very cautious of the existence of a strong nahs 
separating the master of the ascendant and the “5 n on the one 
hand, and the master of the need, on the other. Furthermore, 
beware of the attachment of a nahs to the master of the need, to 
the "5 or to the master of the ascendant as it does not have 
anything to do with the need. Let the acceptance from the third 
or sixth phases, which I have described, whether in su'ud or 
nuhus, be collectively in su'ud. Additionally, avoid dropping 
the master of the need, the O and the D, and the master of the 
poles. If this difficult situation takes place, let the coercer of the 
five eclipses join the coercer of the meanings of the need. Let 
both be in su'ud and in an upside down position. Moreover, 
watch out for a nahs being attached to the master of the D, the 
master of al-Rabi and the ascendant, because this will spoil it 
and bring nahs to the outcome of the need. 

Whenever you want to plan or deal with an action to 
produce a certain result or a result which is perpetual, let that 
and the “D be in a dual-body constellation and clear of nuhus. 
Also, let the ascendant be in a sound condition. If the plan is for 
gold, strengthen the O and let it be in a good situation when 
you start you endeavor. Maintain this situation for the D every 
time you start an action. 

We have advised you, may Allah bless you, of good things 
which will be with you in many of your actions. Be scrupulous 
and use analogy with their partial matters. These are some of 
the pillars of making talismans and the key to them. Allah 
prohibits dealing with the art of stars because it leads to the art 
of talismans. My purpose for revealing this science is to 


87 


-»2{Picatrix}> 


promote reflection by those concerned. This is what Aristotle 
means when he says to Alexander, 

"If you can make a move similar to and in agreement with a 
celestial movement and with a choice of stars, you will achieve 
your desire and fulfill your wish." 

How true is Aristotle's advice! This is the difference between 
the philosophers endeavors and attempts of the uninformed. 

Allah says, 

"They know but the outer in the life of this world, but of the 
end of things they are heedless." 

This is an indication to the profound nature and secrets of 
science. 



88 



-^Chapter Four^ 8 * 


Y OU MAY KNOW, THAT THE ANCIENT talisman- 
makers believed that in each quarter of the celestial 
sphere, eight parts move inwardly and eight move 
outwardly. Many of those who dealt with ephemeris 
had overlooked this fact in their calculations although it is very 
useful in the profession of talisman-making. In order to study 
this, you need to review the history of King Augustus. Go back 
128 years from the date of King Augustus; that marks the end of 
the incoming eight parts in that era. After that, the beginning of 
the incoming parts will start. Then you add to these years 313 
years from the beginning of Augustus' rule to the beginning of 
Diocletianus' rule and add to that the number of years he 
served as king. Take 1/80 of that; in each 80 years of these, one 
part will start moving. The even number of eighties is eight. The 
remainder is added to the calculations of the O and the five 
planets rotating around their axis. By this, you can determine 
what you want from this art. Thus, do not neglect the incoming- 
and-outgoing movement of planets because this is the backbone 
in making talismans for the purpose of producing images. You 
may know that this is their greatest concealed secret. These 
eight parts complete their incoming-and-outgoing movements 
once in every 360 years. 


89 


-»^{Picatrix}> 


I explained to you that when they complete their outgoing 
movement, you can determine their incoming and outgoing. 
This knowledge is essential for producing the desired effects. 
The incoming-and-outgoing is a consequence of the 
constellations' movement from East to West or from West to 
East. No other phase is useful. When the incoming phase starts, 
this will be an indication of what events take place in the world. 
Similarly, if the ongoing phase starts, it will be an indication of 
other events caused by the incoming and outgoing phases. You 
may bear in mind that the incoming-and-outgoing phases are 
characteristics of the constellations' band, not of the straight 
path. 

King Augustus became a king 200 years after King 
Alexander which means that the former rule ended 260 years 
after King Alexander's rule. As for his reference to the 310 year 
period between Augustus rule and Diocletianus, this was when 
King Augustus removed another King from power; that is 12 
years before Christ. Accordingly, this adds up to 4,988 years of 
the history of the world. In order for the total number of years 
to agree with the total number of Alexander's years, you 
subtract these 12 years. Accordingly, the increase in 
Diocletianus' years will be 301 years in addition to the above- 
mentioned 128 years. Consequently, the increase in 
Diocletianus' years will be 429 years. 


90 




-^Chapter Five^«* 

I READ IN HERMES' WORKS something concerning this 
art of miracles, which I would like to cite. He divided this 
art into three types: the art of talismans, which has been 
mostly treated and dealt with by the Sabians and the 
Nabatean's slaves. Part of this field is the art of planets and 
offering them sacrifices, incense and drawings. The second type 
was the specialty of the Greeks who were the pioneers in the art 
of stars. This is an advanced and excellent art. The third type is 
the art of the qalaftirijat (potentials?), promoting inspirations, 
seriousness, and knowing spirits among which similar words 
are distributed. This art was the specialty of the Indians, the 
Sakasiks of Yemen, and the Copts of Egypt. Each of these 
sciences has its own philosophic origin, as well as introductions. 

It is known about the Indians that they are advanced in the 
science of poisons which cannot be treated by medicine. By 
using certain words or making certain movements, they can kill 
or have the hearer change his mind. They developed a musical 
instrument called al-kankala with one string on one body. They 
can produce any tune and notes with this instrument. 
Additionally, they have strange secrets such as impregnating a 
woman without sexual relationships by directing certain 
movements at her. They also have a drink which prevents old 
age, gray hair, curved back and natural body degeneration. This 


91 


->^{Picatrix}> 


drink is especially made and used by them only. They have the 
most capable people in making magic and illusions; they 
perceive that there is a building behind the equator in the South 
and they are the ones referred to as djinn and demons. They are 
in the kind of world which cannot be seen by the naked eye; 
they intermarry and die by natural law and believe that their 
guides in the celestial sphere are 5 and the Tail. According to 
their history, one of their leaders called Adam was the 
beginning of their march due to his uniqueness. Their leader in 
this art claims that every image in the world of being and 
corruption is developed by the fixed planets thereby creating 
several types of configurations in the sky. He also claims that 
there are images in the sky that are not available on earth. These 
images are used by magicians in ceremonies or talismans to 
draw certain arrangements which they term as rings such as 
this figure: 


o 

o 


o 


o 

o 


The lines between these rings are the beams of these planets 
to earth as well as between the fixed planets. This arrangement 
as shown in the following figure: 

3: 

-denotes their own image and is known to people devoted to 
observation and ceremonies. This is what is being reported and 
arranged by practitioners of legerdemain and incantation and 
not what the fixed planets develop in the sky. 



-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Hermes also claims that some of the images of planets are 
illusionary, not real and, as a group, they only indicate that 
degree. This marvelous insight could not have been attained by 
this man without reviewing the books of the Indians who deal 
with this science. Nonetheless, they use these images in 
accordance with the established planets' arrangements at certain 
times and known ascendant. They also use optimism, 
castigating, forewarning, and expressions to strengthen their 
confidence in questions, perceptions and retrieving buried 
valuables. 

Additionally, they make use of halos, the halos of the O and 
the D, rainbows, shooting stars, comets and blackness in the O 
to identify the high effects. All of these support and strengthen 
the sought outcome. Moreover, they believe that there are 
beautiful and ugly images created by the fixed planets in the 
celestial sphere. Thus, if someone is bom while the ascendant is 
a beautiful image and the O and the D are in beautiful images, 
this will be an indication that the bom will be happy; however, 
if bom while the ascendant is an ugly image, and the O and the 
D are in an ugly image, he will be unfortunate. Artful actions, 
questions and talismans have similar effects. Furthermore, they 
believe that the shares of stars are like the night mixed dreams 
that do not indicate anything because they are mixed, and 
therefore, they should be avoided, and others should be looked 
at. These are frequently considered in birth, requests and artful 
acts. Besides, they think that dreams are the result of mental 
strength and its connection with the celestial world. 
Accordingly, what you see there, are images of things on earth. 
This true vision and its science is close to the science of stars. 
Therefore, by relying on this closeness, they use the strength of 5 
as an indication of the status of the bom if 9 is strong. 
Nonetheless, dreams may be the result of a personal conjecture 
or confusion. 


92 


93 


*»S(Picatrix}3«- 


You may know that the truth of dreams is an objective 
representation of personal matters, neutralizing the five senses 
and employing reflection. The force of imagination composes 
what it perceives from tangible images and separates them from 
one another. It also has a third function and that is likeness; if 
the speaking mind, as perfect as it may be, helps the dreamer 
see something which will be seen as it is. But if the force of 
imagination is more perfect, the perception will be in meaning. 
For instance, if the perfect mind sees a dog or a lion about to 
attack him, it will come out as perceived. However, if the force 
of imagination was more perfect, it will be perceived as a 
lawman or a thief, and perception is by meaning. If the natural 
desire is strong, and the mind is preoccupied with it as well as 
with clothes and other daily activities, these concentrations and 
activities will be envisioned as involvement in sensual 
pleasures, swimming and similar actual daily activities. For 
example, if one is preoccupied with having sexual relations 
because of abundant stored energy, he will experience puberty 
acts. If full of fluid, he will see in his dream rivers; if he has a 
cold and apathetic temper, he will see nightmares; if he has a 
hot temper, he will see fires and furnaces, and so forth. 
Likewise, the essence of prediction is the intuitive knowledge of 
human nature by reflecting on what is being looked at for 
making a prediction, whether it is a statute that can be seen, or 
something that can be heard in the case of reflection. The force 
of imagination is sent to look into the sought knowledge. If his 
force of imagination is strong enough, he can visualize the 
knowledge like looking at a mirror, and then he can use what he 
saw and heard to reach some sort of knowledge. This is similar 
to the function of the force of imagination force when the senses 
are dormant. It acts upon the tangibles, which he can see when 
he is awake, and then adds them to what is being mentally 
perceived to develop a dream. If the tangibles and the perceived 
images are proportionate and the body and its conditions are in 


94 



-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}^ 


harmony, the dreams will be true; otherwise, they will be 
confused dreams. 

Be aware that fortune telling is derived from the fifth essence 
called revelation. It is one of the imagining forces of the mind 
which goes through the particulars until it becomes fully aware 
of them, and then it can advise him of these particulars either 
when he is asleep or awake. If the imagining force is ideal, the 
particulars will be available to him similar to the mirror, as we 
mentioned before, which reflects and reports these particulars 
as they are. However, this information pertains only to the 
particulars; it does not deal with mental perception. If he only 
becomes ideally aware of these perceptions, he becomes wise. 
But if he becomes ideally aware of both, he becomes a prophet, 
and this is limited to the persons who receive perfect revelation 
from the First Creator. In this case, what the Creator transmits 
through his revelation to the active mind, will be transmitted 
from the active mind to his acted upon mind. However, when 
this revelation is transmitted from the active mind to his 
imagining force, his acted-upon mind becomes wise, but if it is 
transmitted to his imagining faculty, he becomes a prophet. This 
person will be in the highest rank of mankind and the happiest. 
This is the source, as well as the end of every good. We seek 
virtues to be happy, and we get there by improving our 
manners, taking care of our households, and reforming and 
uniting the Ummah 28 by which it can attain happiness. The 
knowledge of beings, how, why and what these beings are, is 
the theoretical part of it. Beginning with tangibles we ascend 
from this point to theological levels according to the individual 
potential. This is the real happy and ideal person. Happiness is 
the righteousness which is sought for the sake of righteousness; 
it is not sought at any time for achieving other things because 


28 . 

The Islamic community, founded by Muhammad at Medina, comprising individuals 

bound to one another by religious ties on a tribal model.-OED 


95 


-^Picatrix}^ 


there is nothing beyond happiness that is more ideal. Abu Nasr 
al-Farabi 29 refers to this subject in his introduction on the results 
of actions by saying: "Trivial matters may lead to great 
accomplishments, and these are the actions by which happiness 
can be attained, such as benign actions and intentions which 
lead to good deeds. He who achieves that will enjoy an 
everlasting life, a pleasure unblemished by any sorrow, a 
knowledge clear of any misinformation and a wealth pure of 
any poverty. The Prophet, may Allah grant him salvation, says 
in this regard, "O Allah, there is no life as good as life in the 
hereafter. May Allah admit us in it and help us to follow the 
path which leads to it". 

Going back to our topic, I would like to add that the Indians 
claim that a spirit may appear to the magician as a person which 
communicates with him and teaches him whatever it likes. It 
may endear him to kings and sultans or solve or complicate 
things for him. Spirits were portrayed by the ancient 
generations as pictures of different things on their temples, 
which they believed would fulfill any request or wish. They also 
claim that talismans are more influential than choices because 
they are made by the nature of the whole. It is analogous to a 
miracle because it uses natural characteristics, since natural 
characteristics can produce individual strange results. Some of 
the examples of these wonderful actions are protecting a person 
who wears a red ruby necklace from plagues and other 
diseases. By combining the particular and the whole, a talisman 
may act to repel mosquitoes, lice and flies. It does this by 
incorporating in it a celestial arrangement and physical 
materials which are made from it, for them in accordance with 
the principle that the being of a thing is its matter, which is a 
natural characteristic. Nonetheless, the purpose of mentioning 
the characteristic here is to let you know the true essence of 

Alpharabius, a tenth century Islamic philosopher of Turkish origin .-Legacy ofIslam. 


96 


■^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


talismans, and that whatever is made in this world to achieve a 
certain result is accomplished through a special purpose 
talisman. You will realize that afterwards. 



97 



-^Chapter Six}§«* 


T he objective, may allah bless you, of 

mentioning the characteristics is to let you know that 
anything that acts naturally, may increase or decrease 
its action. However, if this action was specialized for a 
certain function, it will be more complete and stronger, and its 
manifestation will be clearer and more obvious. This is similar 
to the case of scammonia 30 attraction to jaundice. The cause for 
that is that scammonia is hot and dry, which are similar to the 
characteristics of jaundice. You may also know that if the 
naturally acting medicine is specialized for a certain disease, its 
effect will be stronger. A talisman is more fascinating; that can 
be manifested by the various types of contribution of planets, on 
one hand, and accepting these contributions, on the other. 
Contributing is more complete, may Allah bless you. When you 
make a talisman, you should deliberately start with a symbol 
and an image of acceptance, so that contribution from planets 
can be given with full consent. By doing this, a talisman will 
produce the sought objective with a lasting effect and an 
expanding spirit. The purpose of this example is to clarify the 


in 

A gum-resin obtained from the tuberous roots of convolvulus scammonia used in 
medicine as a strong purgative; also, the dried tuberous root from which the drug is 
prepared. The plant Convolvulus Scammonia, native in Syria and Asia Minor, having a 
fleshy root which furnishes the scammony of commerce.- OED 


99 




-»^{Picatrix}> 


contribution of planets in achieving the sought objective and the 
picture of acceptance of this contribution. Many people, who 
make talismans all the time, do not know that. 

Accordingly, if you want to make something out of animals, 
compose a product out of plants or fabricate something out of 
rocks. Collect parts of these things first, and then pound them, 
crush them, mix them or use any other method until you finish. 
Nature and planets will continue to manage and complete this 
process until the above things produce the final planned results, 
such as making dyes, reproduction of animals, as well as bees', 
snakes', and scorpions' functions, etc. The same thing can be 
said about natures and characters as well as about producing 
medicine. This is also similar to developing sperm in the womb 
until they reach the stage where nature and planets start 
performing their function gradually to produce the planned 
outcome. Another example is the production of rocks from 
water and metal. Initially they are in a liquid form like semen 
and then winds beat it until it becomes foam. Subsequently, 
metal and other surrounding substances keep whipping it until 
it reaches its final solid form. The same is true for plants and 
their production. Parallel to that is the first stage of mold 
formation; it initially goes back to a similar moist substance, 
which is the essence of being, and to other similar accepted 
models and images, and when it gets to that state, it begins 
forming the model. This is achieved by the resumed acceptance, 
not by the initial acceptance. This acceptance is accomplished by 
dew and moisture which it acquires at this stage. All other 
things that are produced by profession must coincide with these 
models of formation and being. Without a being, the sought 
image will never be accepted because, in order to make a thing 
by means of generating and composing, first you must prepare 
the components which make up that thing so they are ready to 
accept a different form. For example starch is made from food. 



-»§{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


while the ingredients that make up vermicelli 31 and sweets are 
made from starch. By the same token, sauce, cheese and butter 
are made from milk, and yam from cotton and so forth. The 
reason for this is whenever a substance with a certain image 
accepts another image, the first substance will vanish and the 
new image acquires a new acceptance by which it accepts a 
second image. Accordingly, if the new image is accepted, it 
becomes ordinary for the remainder of other images. This is also 
true for the fluid substance in this world. As for the higher 
world, it is either an actual substance and an eternal image or a 
unique image that does not have substance. 

Whereas our objective from the above examples has been 
clarified, I would like you to know that talismans are similar. 
The objective of a talisman-maker is to let one matter be willing 
to accept an image, such as the apparent effect of bay seeds 
against snakes' venom, saffron against anoles 32 , sour and bitter 
substances against hornets, and hornets' attraction to roses and 
licorice roots. Another example is the increase of semen with an 
increase in the acidity of the flowing fluid. The body of a 
talisman is composed of more than one ingredient and when 
these ingredients are combined, they accept the sought result of 
the new compound. 

This is similar to medicines which physicians prescribe in the 
treatment of illness and pain. If these medicines can be taken or 
used individually, then you should do that. That is what 
experienced physicians do. Jahja Ibn Masawaih advises, in this 
regard, that as long as you can treat a patient with a single¬ 
ingredient medicine, do not use a compound medicine. 
However, if you need to use a compound medicine, which has 
different ingredients, let the sought effect of this compound be 


31 

A kind of pasta made in the form of long, slender, hard threads, and used as an article of 
diet.- OED 

37 

A genus of lizards of the Iguana family.-OjED 


100 


101 



-»2{Picatrix}> 


similar to the total effects of each ingredient. The same thing can 
be said about baked goods, theriaca 33 , meals of individual 
pieces such as fruits and compounds such as sweets. 

You may also know that an individual planet may have 
different functions like fire. Fire can be used to heat honey. If it 
is used adequately, it gives honey a delicious taste; however, if 
the heat increases, honey will boil over and bum, and it 
becomes distasteful and bitter. Similar to this is the function of 
planets depending on whether they are in a bright or in a dark 
degree. 

Planets have two types of functions: subjective motion and 
accidental heat which follows their motion. Heat is the essence 
of motion and motion is the essence of the function of planets. 
This statement particularly applies to the sensory faculties. 
What applies to the mental faculty is that motion is the ethereal 
essence of fixed planets. This essence comes to fixed planets 
through longing for virtue and the general good. Thus, by 
necessity, heat follows motion and motion follows the first 
perfection which cannot be surpassed by any other perfection at 
all. Analogous to the above are the collective orbits of the 
celestial bodies, their individual orbits and the total heat 
emanating from them. The effects of the celestial body orbits 
influence the effects of planets, not the other way around. The 
function of planets is stagnant and motionless; however, planets 
produce magnificent effects and wonderful contributions which 
do not exist in celestial orbits at all. Ether is the first true acting 
nature, and the contribution of planets is but its dye and 
garment like dyes and garments we use although the former are 
prettier and better. The celestial orbital degrees are not real at 
all; this term is being used for convenience and calculation 
purposes, because there are no parts of the celestial orbits which 
are active and others which are acted upon. In motion and 


33 


An antidote to poison, esp. to the bite of a venomous serpent -OED 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


nature, all are one; there is no difference at all between the part 
and the whole. 

Angles are not void of fixed planets or their fixed 
arrangements because the fixed planet orbits are full of fixed 
planets. What is meant by an angle being void of fixed planets is 
that besides the fixed planets that we are able to observe, there 
are other distant planets whose detection is absolutely beyond 
our resources. Accordingly, it has been envisaged that a planet 
in a fixed position does not do anything since it is not in its 
angle, elevation, apogee, nadir, return or straight motion. 
However, it will be on its way to every one of these situations, 
but it will not have an arrangement similar to those of either 
different or similar planets. Despite the fact that these positions 
are active, they appear to be inactive since they are acquired by 
fixed planets which do not settle in the sky, and accordingly, 
they appear to be inactive. This position is abstract and 
ambiguous. Think about it. Although planets are active by 
nature, they have two functions, general and specific. The 
general function is the action which has no direction and the 
specific function is the action which has a direction. For 
example, food in the stomach is absorbed by the liver and 
transformed into a substance similar to blood which flows in the 
veins. But when the liver transfers blood to various organs, it 
transforms into blood what seems to be blood and into bones 
and limbs what seems to be bones and limbs. 

This situation is analogous to the composed arrangements of 
the planets' orbits. There are reasons for the virtuous action of 
planets; if a planet is in its summit or in what is called its 
apogee, it joins and becomes associated with the planet above it 
and performs its action, and consequently, it does elegant 
things. However, if it is in its lowest point (nadir), it does the 
function of the planet underneath it. In the same manner, the 
orbits of fixed planets accomplish the same function of the 
ethereal orbit. The D's orbit does the function of at least two of 


102 


103 








-»S{Picatrix}3«- 


the four fundamental elements of nature, especially fire and air 
due to their kindness. Likewise, 5 always does the function of 
fixed planets when it is with them and at its farthest point, but it 
does the function of Z if it is at its nearest ,lowest point. This is 
similar to the relationship between every individual planet and 
what is above or under it. This is an important element in the 
science of talismans which has been concealed by the 
philosophers of this profession. Had we kept it hidden from the 
seekers of this approach, we would have acted niggardly and 
avariciously. 

You ought to know that the slower the planets are, the 
stronger their effect and the more elegant they will be. The 
faster they are, the weaker their effects will be. Moreover, the 
effect of planets at medium speed are medium. This is not an 
absolute relationship; it is relative because this situation may be 
reversed; the slower may become less effective and the slower 
may become faster and consequently become more effective. 
These relationships exist between the ethereal orbit and the 
movement of beings on earth. As for the relationship of the 
ethereal orbit to beings on earth, the heavier the being is the 
stronger the effect will be and the lighter, the weaker. The 
relationship of beings on earth to orbits of fixed planets is 
similar; the lighter, the more effective and the heavier, the less 
effective. 

However, there was a substantial disagreement on this 
subject. Some of the ancient philosophers believed that the 
relationships were the opposite; they thought that the ethereal 
orbit and the orbit of planets are directly related. The orbit of a 
slow-moving planet is necessarily very similar to the ethereal 
orbit in stillness and heaviness. Simple beings are similar in 
these basic qualities; the slow is similar to the slow and the fast 
is similar to the fast. Many difficult symbols and Treatises were 
written on this subject. 


104 


•^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Let me mention to you one of the secrets of the ancient 
professionals about making talismans. You should know that 
when the “5 is with 5, the effect of 5 will prevail because 5's 
influence is much greater than the “5's. This situation applies to 
every other planet when it is with 5 since 5's effect is greater 
than all the effects of other fixed planets. This is either because 
of its height, its closeness to the ethereal orbit and to the orbit of 
fixed planets or because of its lethargic motion and its striking 
similarity to the ethereal orbit. Nonetheless, if the O, Z or 9 are 
associated with the actions of 5, they affect in a remarkable 
manner these actions and improve them slightly. The same 
situation emerges if fixed planets are added to Z. These 
arrangements and relationships apply to the “5 without any 
deviation whatsoever; its effects influence fire and air, and with 
this influence, fire and air affect water and earth, and, 
subsequently, the effect of the above four have bearing on the 
second generated being. 

It is possible that whenever two planets join, they develop 
three different situations: a plus, a minus and a median. The “5's 
effect will be governed by 5's power when the “5 joins 5 and as 
long as the latter is in its zenith, noble or apogee. The same 
situation prevails only if the “5 and 5 join in one path at these 
positions. This condition will also take place when 5 and other 
planets join in these positions. However, the effect of the “5 may 
be a lot stronger than 5's if the “5 was in the above graceful 
positions and 5 was in the opposite positions. If the “5 and 5 are 
together in positions opposite to the above graceful positions, 
the “5's effect will be subordinate to 5's as in the first situation. If 
5 is in its graceful positions and the “5 in its own normal 
positions, the effect of the “5 will be very weak. When 5 is in a 
straight and return path as well as in other perfectly straight 
paths, both effects will be even, especially if it happens that the 
“5 is in its summit. This is because this high and straight position 
of the “5 is not equal to the descending position of 5. However, 


105 


^Picatrix^- 


the situation with 5 and 2 is different from that with ? and the 
"5 although they may be similar to a great extent. Thus, if 5 is 
high and so is 2, Ts effect will be stronger. Nonetheless, if 2 is 
high and 5 is in its first path and in a graceful and straight 
position, then the dominance of 2 is not certain. However, if the 
arrangement is different, 5 will dominate and Ts effect will 
completely diminish. The same situation applies to 5 and o'. 
When they are together, cf's effect will be stronger except if any 
of the above conditions take place. As for 9 and 9, each one has 
its own arrangement and similarity to other planets. However, 
the D is different because it does not have either the 
arrangement or the similarity to the high planets. This is the 
basis to be relied on in dealing with these accidental occasions 
and the need for it is very essential in the science of talismans. 

You should also know that the action of planets is a function 
of their being and since their being is simple, it is immune to 
corruption. Corruption only occurs in compounds made of 
different components. The action of the orbits of the whole 
eastern sphere is the absolute general action because it moves 
all orbits and planets. The reason for this is that the sphere 
orbits are the cause of the planet orbits and motion. In fact, it is 
absolutely still because it is the moving force of all orbits and 
planets. It has been said that it moves the whole, but it, itself, is 
not moving because that is impossible. Although the fixed- 
planet orbits are common, they are relative to the movement of 
the orbit of the whole and this is the case with the rest of the 
orbits. It should be understood that the motion of each sphere is 
common to all orbits and planets in it as well as to their own 
motion. Another cause for the action of the planets is their 
orbits, since planets by themselves do not move; they only move 
by accident. Accordingly, planet orbits have two actions: by 
being and by accidental heat, because, as we said before, heat 
follows the movement of planets only if it develops immediately 
after the movement. As we mentioned above, the entire effect 



-»§{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


and contribution sought from talismans is moving whatever is 
movable and transforming it from force into action. This is 
because an image reflects a similar resemblance of anything and 
matter is susceptible to accept everything. Every matter has an 
image of a particular compound and for every compound there 
is an image of the matter composed of that particular 
compound. For example, a small fire grows bigger because it 
brings out the primordial substance of fire by force until it 
develops it via its own being, and thus, it grows bigger by 
(natural) action. 

Additionally, you ought to know that the opposite does not 
ruin what is being developed by action; however, it can do that 
to what is being developed by force. What is being developed 
according to natural laws will be sound and what is being 
developed by an unnatural action will not be sound. 
Accordingly, what is heated by action can move what is heated 
by force because heating takes place by principle and the cause 
for this heat makes it hotter. As a being heated by action can 
move the heated being by force, the heated being by force 
moves, by nature, the heated being by action. The principle of 
acting by being is the same as being acted upon by its own 
being. 



106 


107 






^Chapter Seven}§«* 


W HAT WE HAVE EXPLAINED applies to the image 
of the contribution and acceptance of the effect of 
talismans and their actions as well as to the images 
of similar and different beings. Similitude and 
difference are of important significance in making talismans. 
There is a similar functional relationship between the action of 
planets relative to the action of stone from which the effect of a 
talisman is derived, on the one hand, and the time and place of 
making the talisman, on the other. Therefore, relativity is one of 
the important fundamentals in making talismans. 

Quantity is also similar because quantity, as stated in related 
instructions, is divided into two basic divisions: the connected 
and the separate. The connected is divided into five 
subdivisions: the line, the plane, the body, the time, and the 
place. The separate part is divided into two subdivisions: the 
statement and the number. The knowledge of these parts are 
essential in making talismans. As for the line, it is the azimuth 
that exists between the planets and the talisman and the 
azimuth between the talisman and the planned expected effect 
from the talisman. Both are similar and congruent. These two 
azimuth subdivisions of the line are what have been stated in 
the instructions about the straight line. They define the straight 
line as the line that faces all of the points placed on one another. 


109 



^Picatrix}> 


This is the most qualified statement about the talisman, the 
straight line is the object upon which the carried thing makes 
one pass beginning from the initial point until it reaches the end 
point, which is tangential to what the thing ends up to. In this 
regard, we say so-and-so is facing so-and-so and in his view. 
Similar descriptions can be made as long as there is no 
obstruction of what takes place on the straight line. Another 
example of this is the beams of planets shining on a body placed 
at the point on which the beams are shining. Be aware and 
cognizant of this. Another reason for considering this as the 
most qualified statement in making a talisman is that for the 
contribution of planets to produce the required action of a 
talisman, the same action of that stone or thing must be at a 
spotlight suitable for producing a similar effect. It is a must that 
the line between the planet and the talisman must be straight in 
order for the contribution to be complete. If it is not, the 
contribution will not be complete. 

The plane is essentially the form of contribution since it is the 
diffusion of the effect of a talisman in that place. If the effect 
spreads, then it is by necessity a plane. For the same reason, air 
is transformed by this action as it is transformed by heat and so 
are cold temperature, smell, light, colors and so forth. Similarly, 
the thing upon which the line passes from the planets to the 
talisman and from the talisman to the place passes is a plane. 
These secrets and the causes for these phenomena were not 
disclosed. 

Time is associated with the motion of a body which explains 
the essence of the talisman itself. Regarding the function of 
talismans, time is divided into several parts . One of these is the 
time of observing planets as to when their contribution is 
complete and when it is not. This is a function of the inclination 
of planets. Another part is the duration of time needed to 
observe the degree which, in reality, is more effective than 
planets. One of these is the time of observing planets when there 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


is a need to locate a planet which is linked to another planet 
either in one degree, facing each other, in a triangular or in a 
quadruple 34 configuration. Other similar times are needed to 
identify the location of planets at which they render their 
actions, whether complete or not, such as integrity, decline and 
honor or give contributions such as su'ud and nuhus in dark or 
bright degrees, in producing effects, such as breaking off, and 
the like of what has been written in this regard. This is the great 
secret of the essence of talismans. Similar to this relationship is 
the relationship between the brought in and the brought out as 
well between similitude and contrariety. Other examples are 
observing the time of the end of the contribution and the time 
for making a talisman, as well as other time-related situations. 

This art treats place as an aspect of quantity. It is the place of 
observing and facilitating it so that it can be observed at the 
required time. Some of these is the place of the talisman, the 
location of setting it up relative to air and earth, exposing it, 
hiding it and so forth. 

One of these is the place in which a talisman is made. 
Another is the place in which the substance of a talisman is 
derived. This is needed for the action of talismans whose effect 
and contribution are disbelieved when heard because they are 
miraculous. Some of these are the action of talismans and their 
effect in things that are not animal, such as the effect of 
removing sand, moving rocks, preventing plagues, rain and 
clouds, changing the direction of wind and so on. There is no 
need at this juncture to give more examples of these actions 
since this part of the art must not be used at all. 

Statements and numbers, as an aspect of the separate 
quantity, are needed in literature, signs, prediction and in 
pursuing tracks and so forth. Numbers are especially needed in 
these actions because they pertain to time, and because time 


14 • i 

trine and square. 


no 


in 



•»2{Picatrix}> 


specifies the number of the rotation of the planet in its orbit. 
When we say from this time to that, we only indicate a number, 
and when it gets to that (number), the rotation ends. Thus, if we 
say that an event takes place from a certain hour through a 
period of forty-two days, we are only giving a number. 

You may also know that a signpost is a part of this type of 
art because it determines the shape of the talisman. It is also a 
part of this art, which is believed to affect most of the functions 
of talismans as well as their images in the place where they are 
placed. Moreover, this situation is an integral part of the 
signpost. How similar this relationship is to these phenomena! 

Quality is the real cause of talismans because the location of 
the talisman action, which is similar to the location of the 
quality action, may possess a complete force, and by this force, 
it is capable of diffusing its action. This is, in fact, connecting 
higher bodies with lower bodies. In other words, this location 
must be similar to the location of contributing planets and must 
accept their effects in order for the sought results to be 
produced. 

As we have mentioned repeatedly, certain planets are 
characterized by certain functions. Some planets are specialized 
in cities, animals, plants, rocks and so on. Thus, if a rock in a 
certain location accepts the action of a planet, or if it is similar to 
other things that accept the action of that planet, then its nature, 
that is its quality, will be similar to the accepted action of the 
planet in question. The same situation applies to the rock 
because the nature of the rock from which a talisman is made 
needs to be strengthened. When the body of the rock develops 
the predominant characteristic, its effect will spread and 
prevail. Those who deal with this branch of knowledge cannot 
find any other approach than adding acquired qualities to the 
rock, which are similar to it, until they become the prevailing 
quality of the rock. The same thing is done with pastes such as 
theriaca whose dominant strength is acquired through the 


112 



-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


individual strengths of many of the component medicines. 
These medicines interact with one another to produce 
wonderful effects in several important fields such as medicine, 
art and other natural disciplines and talismans, as well as in 
curing infectious disease and in the interacting of rocks with one 
another. My advice regarding the second issue is: in every 
action seek similitude and avoid contrariness. I have 
summarized what I have mentioned above in this sentence 
hoping that you will understand it. 



113 


^Chapter Eighth 


T HE IDEA OF COMBINING different ranks of natural 
bodies was developed by ancient philosophers through 
this approach. They learned the strength of ranks of 
medicine, food and others, and then combined them 
together until they discovered the benefits of medicines and 
their various effects. It is necessary to mention here an 
important fact; the ancient philosophers disagreed about what 
the simple bodies are and how many they are. Some researchers 
say that the basic and primordial natural elements are heat, 
coldness, moisture and dryness. They agreed, however, that 
they are qualities and basic simple elements. Then they called 
them compounds as we say hot, cold, moist and dry. When we 
say hot, we mean that a matter has acquired heat and the same 
can be said about the other elements. This is different from 
saying heat, coldness, etc. After this combination, there is 
another combination as in saying hot and dry, hot and moist, 
cold and dry, and cold and moist. This combination is 
secondary because it is not one; heat is neither dryness nor 
moisture and the same applies to coldness with relation to other 
elements. There is a third combination as in saying fire, air, 
water and earth. This combination is in addition to the first 
basic elements and the second and third combinations. 
Following that is a fourth combination which pertains to 


115 


■^{Picatrix}> 


persons. This is also divided into various divisions. As for 
climate, the seasons are four: spring, autumn, winter and 
summer. As for people and animals, there are the gall, the 
blood, the bile and the phlegm. Be aware that the basic elements 
of mankind are much more kinder than the basic elements of 
animals because the latter are much more dense. The basic 
elements of plants are fats, dyes, seeds and roots. Similar to that 
are the elements of rocks. The relationship between the 
characteristics of the elements of mankind and animals are 
similar to the relationship between plants and rocks. The 
kindness of mankind elements is similar to those of plants, and 
the characteristics of the elements of rocks are comparable to 
those of animals. Following these combinations are the pre¬ 
composed things, which are called the combination of the 
seven-degree compounds. This is the final stage of combining, 
such as medicines, buildings and other similar things - the 
simple elements of which have been attributed to them. The 
combined elements are seven parts and the sub-parts of these 
are 28. The following table depicts the summary of what we 
have explained in detail: 


Simple basic elements 

heat 

coldness 

moisture 

dryness 

1st compound elements 

hot 

cold 

moist 

dry 

2nd compound elements 

hot & 
dry 

cold &. 

moist 

hot & 

humid 

cold & 
dry 

3rd compound elements 

fire 

water 

air 

earth 

4th compound elements 

summer 

winter 

spring 

autumn 

5th compound elements 

gall 

phlegm 

blood 

bile 

6th compound elements 

dyes 

seeds 

fats 

roots 


Heat, coldness, humidity and dryness come, by sensory 
detection and analogy, before fire, air, water and earth in many 
aspects; fire is described as hot and dry because of its 
association with heat. Fire is neither described as heat nor as a 


116 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


compound because a compound is either composed of its 
fundamental elements by which it is described or a constant 
compound. Accordingly, heat is before fire, humidity before air, 
coldness before water and dryness before earth. This is only an 
analytic approach. The same situation applies to the liver, the 
spleen, the gall bladder, the heart, the lungs, the head, the legs, 
the hands, as well as the rest of the organs of the human body. 
As mentioned above, heat is the product of the constant motion 
of the celestial bodies in their orbits. However, coldness is the 
product of the center, the Earth, which is called the center of all 
orbits. Thus, it possesses the good for the entire world. 
Coldness is contrary to heat in all aspects, including 
characteristics, motion and stillness. Heat is the qualitative 
combining of similar things and dispersing opposite things. On 
the contrary, coldness combines opposite things and disperses 
similar things. This is how difference and contradiction become 
the equal inherent qualities of opposite things. Otherwise, the 
part will be disrupted. 

Thus, in order for you to reach your goal, you need to 
research these arts and study them. I did not intend to confuse 
you; on the contrary, I am giving you interesting excerpts from 
various arts to let you have a clear mind and obtain what the 
ancient wise obtained and reach their level of prestige. 



117 



^{Chapter Nine^** 



HERE IS A CONSENSUS REGARDING THE IMAGES of 
the fixed planet groupings and their substantiated effects. 
Some of these are: 


A talisman for repelling a mouse. 

Draw this symbol on a plate of red tin plate at the rise of the 
first phase of 51. This symbol comprises the planets in the SI 
constellation. Place the plate in the location of the mouse, and 
consequently, it will run away from its location. This symbol is: 

A 


A talisman for repelling mosquitoes. 

Draw this symbol on a Sulphur stone at the rise of the 
second phase of "if. Mosquitoes will not get near where you 
place the stone. This is the symbol of the group of planets in the 


*»§{Picatrix}> 


"tf constellation that are capable of repelling mosquitoes. This 
symbol is: 


6b 

A talisman for repelling Hies. 

Draw this symbol on a tin plate at the rise of the third phase 
of IR,. Place it in the location to be off limits for flies. This 
symbol is: 



6b 

A peculiar talisman. 

If you want to have a person whom you love to come to you 
in a hurry, draw the following symbol on a new piece of cloth 
on the day of 9 and in its hour, and while the ascendant is the 
second phase of If with 9 in it. Bum the piece of cloth from one 
end and mention the name of the person in question. As a 
result, he will come quickly to the place of the talisman. This 
symbol emerges when 9 is at its peak strength and in this phase. 
This symbol is: 

X AYk X °^W/ 


120 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


6b 

A talisman for enmity. 

If you plan to promote enmity and separation between two 
persons, you draw this picture on a black tin plate with a black 
tusk of a dog on the day of 5 and in its hour, and while the 
ascendant is in the third phase of % and with 5 in it. Place this 
plate in the location of one of them or in their meeting location, 
and, as a result, they will separate on the worst possible terms. 
This symbol appears when 5 is at its peak strength in this phase. 
This symbol is: 

vtYuV^i-K 


6b 


A talisman for vacating a location and 


preventing its development. 

Draw the following symbol with a tusk of a pig on a tin 
plate on the day of 5 and in its hour, and while the ascendant is 
the second phase of % with 5 in it. Place this plate in the desired 
location, and, as a result, this location will be afflicted with ?'s 


catastrophic influence and will never be developed as long as 
this symbol is in it. This symbol is: 




121 


-^Picatrix}3*- 


I have not seen any more symbols in the Persian works 
regarding this art. In the following chapter, I will explain the 
solid elements of which planets are composed, as well as their 
symbols and wonderful effects. 



122 


-^Chapter Ten^«* 


R OCKS AND STONES OF PLANETS: 3: consists of the 
following rocks: iron, diamond, antimony, pure-black 
onyx, jet, turquoise, magnet, magnesium, gold, ruby, 
golden marqashitha and shadhanj. 

4: lead, diamond, sapphire, ruby, gold, crystal and various 
polished shiny stones. 

Cf: red brass, gray stone, various types of Sulphur, 
marqashina, blood stone, magnet, glass, carbuncle and onyx. All 
rocks of cf are dark red. 

O: gold, arsenic, sand-color rocks, diamond, Pharaoh's 
glass, nacre, polished shiny rocks, shadhanj, emery and ruby. 

9: red brass, lapis azure, pearl, nacre, dahnaj, corals, sand- 
colored rocks, glass, and pearl. 

5: idramus, emery, emerald, mercury, chrysolite, tin, glass 
and marble. 

^): silver, silver-colored marqashina, small pearls, marble, 
lapis azure, onyx and sand-colored rocks. 


The symbols of planets as designated by ancient 
philosophers are as follows: 


123 



-»SfPicatrix}3«- 


SATURN 

JUPITER S 

Mars ££ 

Sun @ 

Venus 

Mercury Y 

Moon 3 


I took the above symbols of planets from The Benefits of the Rocks 
of Mercury, which is also known as al-Katib, from a book written 
by Apollonius and from The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans, 
translated by Picatrix. 

THE SUN 

In the book written by Apollonius, the O is symbolized by a 
woman standing in a carriage pulled by four horses. She holds a 
mirror in her right hand and a club in her left hand held close to 
her chest. Her head is shining. In The Benefits of the Rocks of 
Mercury, the O is symbolized by a standing man stretching his 
hand as if he wants to shake the hand of a person next to him. 
He holds a shield in his left hand. Also there is a picture of a 
dragon under his feet. In The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans, 


124 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


by Quraytun, translated by Picatrix, the O is symbolized by a 
king sitting on a chair with a crown on his head, a picture of a 
crow between his hands and a dragon under his feet. Others 
portray the O in the celestial orbits as a crowned man standing 
on a carriage pulled by four horses. He holds a mirror in his 
right hand and a shield in his left hand. His clothes are all 
yellow. 

Every one of these pictures has certain effects and actions in 
talismans. Afterwards, we will explain them adequately for 
you. 

VENUS 

Apollonius symbolizes 9 by a woman standing with an apple 
in her right hand and holding a comb that looks like a board 
with various pictures on it, in her left hand. In The Benefits of the 
Rocks of Mercury, 9 is symbolized by a human body with the 
head of a bird and legs of an eagle. It was portrayed by others 35 
as a naked woman followed by a child with a necklace around 
his neck, of' is in front of her. Others delineate it as a woman 
with long hair riding on a stag, holding an apple in her right 
hand and a bouquet in her left hand. Her dress is pure white. 

MERCURY, ALSO KNOWN AS AL-KATIB 

Apollonius depicts 9 as a young man with a beard holding a 
rod in his right hand and a cat in his abdomen. Interpretation of 
Spiritual Talismans delineates it as a man with a rooster on his 
head. He sits on a chair, has legs of an eagle, in his left hand a 
torch, and under his legs are some pictures which I will mention 
later. In The Benefits of the Rocks of Mercury, it is symbolized as a 
standing man with two stretched wings on his right sides. At 
his left side is a small rooster, in his right hand a rod, in his left 
hand a round clay pot, and in his middle is a picture similar to 

3 5 The German edition of Picatrix cites these ‘others’ as Ptolemy. 


125 


-$Picatrix}3<- 


the crown of a rooster. Also, two of these pictures are on the top 
of his feet. Others portray it in its orbit as a crowned man riding 
on a peacock, holds a rod in his right hand and a plate in his left 
hand. His clothes are colorful. 

THE MOON 

The D is symbolized in The Benefits of the Rocks of Mercury as 
a beautiful woman with a dragon belt around her waist, two 
snakes on her head, has two horns in the form of snakes, has 
snake bracelets around her wrists and two dragons each with 
seven heads, on her head. Apollonius, the philosopher, portrays 
the D as a woman standing on two oxen, the head of one of 
them is facing the tail of the other. In The Interpretation of 
Spiritual Talismans, the T) is depicted as a man with a head of a 
bird leaning on a cane and holding a tree between his hands. 
Others symbolize the D as a crowned man standing on a 
carriage pulled by four oxen, holding a scepter in his right hand 
and a mirror in his left hand. His clothes are white and green. 

SATURN 

The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans explains that 5 has the 
image of a man whose face is a face of a crow and his legs are 
similar to the legs of a camel. He is sitting on a chair holding a 
cane in his right hand and a lance in his left hand. Apollonius 
says in his book that 5 is a man standing on a mimbar. The 
Benefits of the Rocks of Mercury states that it has the image of a 
standing man, holding a whale in his hands over his head and 
standing on a statue of a lizard. Others mention that T> is 
depicted in its orbit as a man standing on a snake, holding a 
sickle in his right hand and a cane in his left hand. The color of 
his attire is gray and black. 


126 



-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Apollonius states that Z has the image of a man wearing a 
rope wrapped around him. He is sitting on an eagle, putting his 
legs on its shoulders and holding the rest of the rope in his right 
hand. In The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans, Z is portrayed 
as a man with the face of a lion, the legs of a bird and a dragon 
with faces under his feet. He is holding an arrow in his right 
hand stabbing the head of the dragon. In The Benefits of Rocks , it 
is delineated as a man wearing a garment, riding on a dragon 
and holding either a rod or a spear in his hand. Others 
symbolize Z, in its orbit, as a man riding on an eagle. He holds a 
scroll in his right hand and a nut in his left hand. His apparel is 
pure yellow. 

MARS 

Apollonius states that it has an image of a man wearing a 
helmet and a shield, and fastening a sword to his belt. In The 
Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans, it is symbolized as a 
crowned man holding a sword with carved figures on it. The 
Benefits of the Rocks of Mercury states that it has the image of a 
standing naked man and a statue of a virgin woman 
representing 9 standing at his right-hand side with her hair 
braided behind her. O' is putting his right hand around her neck 
and his left hand on her chest and at the same time looking at 
her face. He claims in his book that this image has many effects. 
Others state that O' has the image of a man riding on a lion with 
a sword in his right hand and a human head in his left hand. 
His attire is made of iron and ifrind . 

These are the images that have been presented by the ancient 
philosophers. For every one of these images, there are special 
actions and effects. I will cite in the following treatises some of 
the texts of what they wrote in this field. 


127 


JUPITER 



-$Picatrix}> 


Images on Stones 

The images of the O carved on a pure red segment of onyx 
portray the O as a king sitting on a chair with a crown on his 
head, holding the figure of a crow in his hands and under his 
feet are the following letters: 

c\0 

The holder of this segment will triumph over all kings. This 
was presented in The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans by 
Picatrix. He claims that the O will be at its highest rank. 

Some of these figures are presented in Aristotle's advice to 
Alexander. He says that whoever carves an image of a lion, with 
this figure: 

A 

on a segment of onyx, while the ascendant is £1 and the O, 
cleared of all nuhus, is in it, will never be defeated. Moreover, 
he will fu lfill all his wishes and will never have frightening 
dreams. Additionally, if you carve a picture of a woman sitting 
on a carriage pulled by four horses with a mirror in her right 
hand, a whip in her left hand, seven candles on her head and a 
pool inside the onyx stone, if you carve these images when the 
O is at its highest rank, you will gain the respect and fear of 
everyone you come across or meet. 

Moreover, when you carve on a shathina stone this figure of 
the O: 


128 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}^ 


et?o 

at the first phase of £1 and hold onto it, you will be cured from 
epilepsy when the D is at crescent. 

Hermes mentions in his book, Al-Haditus, that whoever 
carves on a stone called samalinun - a yellow stone with black 
spots, green marks, light and shiny - a figure of a fly in the hour 
of the O and its ascendant and holds onto it, he will not be 
burned by fire even if he gets into it. He claims that this stone is 
available in Persia. 

To repel snakes, carve on a stone an image of a snake in the 
hour of Z when it is 7° from when 5 is 7° from Q, the T) is 7° 
from H,, when Z is 2° from /, and when the Tail is 10° from /. 
On the back of the snake are the following symbols: 


On both sides of the snake are the following symbols: 


Mount this stone on a golden ring and wear it and no beetles 
or snakes will ever get near you. 

For repelling beetles, carve in a stone of myelocyte a picture 
of a beetle in the hour of the O when it is at the peak of its 
prestige, and while 5 is 17 ° from V is 28° from &, and o' is 
in the last degree from Q. Draw on it the following letters: 


129 



^{Picatrix}> 


j^iiyyjby £=¥<==» 

Mount the stone on a golden ring and no beetles will ever 
appear in the location of the ring and will never be seen by the 
person wearing it. 

VENUS 

On a stone of onyx, carve an image of a woman holding in 
her right hand an apple and a comb that looks like a board in 
her left hand. Draw the following numbers: 


Ao > oAo 


The image consists of a human body, the face of a bird and 
the legs of an eagle. The holder of this stone will make all 
people love him. Carve this image in the hour of 9 and at its 
peak prestige. Additionally, carve on a stone of malachite a 
picture of a woman holding an apple in her right hand and a 
comb in her left hand. This is to be done in the second phase of 
Q. The holder of this stone will be happy and in good mood as 
long as he holds onto it. 

Another action of 9 in its hour is to carve a picture of naked 
maid in a stone of lapis azure near the picture of a man wearing 
a chain necklace around his neck. A young child is behind her 
holding a sword. The holder of this stone will be attracted and 
loved by women. 


130 


-»S{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Moreover, if you carve on a stone of lapis azure, in the hour 
and at the peak prestige of 9, a picture of a standing woman 
holding an apple in her hand and inside the stone a female 
sheep, you will have a successful and growing herd. 

In Quraytun's book on talismans, he states that when you 
carve on a stone of quartz a picture of a snake with a scorpion 
on its back in the early morning of Monday and in the hour and 
honor of 9, you will not be bitten by a snake and you will be 
cured from its bite if it is placed in moisture and swallowed. 

Furthermore, when the following symbols: 



are carved on a stone of quartz in the hour of 9, the holder of 
this stone will be loved by children, close to their hearts and 
cannot tolerate staying away from him once they become 
associated with him. 

He who carves on a stone of quartz an image of a standing 
woman with her hair braided in two braids behind her back and 
with two children with wings in her lab in the hour and honor 
of 9, his trips, whether distant or close, will be facilitated and 
will proceed without any trouble as long as he holds onto it. 

On a stone of crystal, carve a picture of three persons 
holding a meeting. The holder of this stone will experience more 
success in his trade than what he expects. 

A picture of a mouse between two cats is carved in the hour 
of 9 and, in its ascendant, is carved on a piece of coral. In this 
picture 9 functions to repel mice from the place of the coral. 
Also, when a picture of an upside down fly is carved on a 


131 


•»§{Picatrix}> 


granite stone in the hour of 9's ascendant, the holder of the 
stone will be off limits to flies. 

Carve the picture of a leech on a stone of dahnaj and a 
picture of two leeches with the head of one facing the tail of the 
other. This picture will remove leeches from the place of the 
stone. This picture is to be drawn and carved when 9 is in its 
hour and ascendant. Be aware of that. 

Additionally, a love talisman is made by carving a picture of 
a well-preserved woman with a standing semi-idol in front of 
her on a white stone. This is to be done in the hour when 9 is 
ascendant. 

Moreover, carve a picture of a woman with a wrapped rope 
in her hand. Her body is striped with fuzz-like stripes. She 
holds in the other hand a fruit that looks like an apple with 
which she stamps wax to cure children from their disease and 
all other ailments. This is to be done in the hour when 9 is 
ascendant. 

Furthermore, carve a picture of the head of a zebra with the 
head of a fly on it on a granite stone. The head should be a little 
oversized. This ought be done in the hour and 9 is ascendant. 
The stone is used to stamp wax for increased production. This 
has been successfully experimented in labyrinths. 

MERCURY 

The Interpretation of Spiritual Talismans states that for 
releasing prisoners and the like, carve on a stone of crystallite 
the picture of a man sitting on a chair with a rooster on his 
head. His legs are those of an eagle, a torch in his hand and the 
following symbols are under his feet: 




•^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


This is to be done in the hour and honor of 9. 

Also, carve on a stone of emerald the following symbols: 

-in its hour and ascendant. The holder of this stone will have 
full command of authors, accountants and laborers. 

On a stone known as mantis, carve the image of a man sitting 
on a distaffed chair with a lead in his right hand writing on a 
scroll in his left hand. This is to be done in the hour of 9 and in 
its honor. If the holder of this stone is a writer and hopes to 
achieve a favor from a ruler, he will be employed by that ruler, 
entrusted with his affairs and favored in every aspect. 

It is stated in the book The Interpretation Spiritual of Talismans, 
that if you carve a picture of a frog on an emerald stone in the 
hour when 5 is ascendant and hold onto it, no one can harm you 
or talk badly about you. On the contrary, your actions will 
always be commended. 

Additionally, when the picture of a mouse or a jerboa is 
carved on an emerald stone of emerald in the hour when 9 is 
ascendant, no one will steal anything from the person who will 
make profits in his trade. 

It is stated in the same book that the person who carves on 
an emerald stone a picture of a lion and the head of a lion and 
writes underneath it a thousand and above it the letter "d" in the 
hour when 9 is ascendant, will be loved by all people and saved 
from the atrocities of kings. 

Other sources state that when a picture of a scorpion is 
carved on a crystallite stone in the when it is ascendant and is 
worn by a pregnant woman, her child will be saved from all 
diseases. 


132 


133 




-»^{Picatrix}> 


Also, if the figure of a hand holding a scale is carved on a 
glass stone in the hour when it is ascendant, this stone will cure 
all types of fever. It has been tested and proven to be effective. 

THE SUN 

An image of a scorpion is carved on a stone of bezoar when 
the “5 is in I>U and in its hour, and while HU is in one of the poles 
of the ascendant. Mount the stone on a golden ring and stamp it 
on a chewed glue of kundur while the D is in HU. If a person is 
bitten by a scorpion, he will be immediately cured when he 
drinks a dose of kundur. This has been tested as we mentioned 
before. 

Besides, if the following symbols: 

l <l\5> 


-are carved on a stone of lapis azure in the hour when the D is 
ascendant and the stone is subsequently submerged in a type of 
beverage which is consumed by two persons, they will become 
friends although they may have been adversary. 

Picatrix states in his book. The Interpretation of Spiritual 
Talismans, that if you carve the picture of the head of a bird 
leaning on a cane with a picture of a daisy tree between its 
hands on a maha (pearl?) stone in the hour when the D is 
ascendant and in its honor, you will not get weary during your 
trip no matter how long the distance may be as long as you 
wear it. 

Carve on a crystal stone the picture of a woman with an 
upright strand in her hair, two oxen under her, one of her legs 
on the head of one ox and the second leg on the head of the 
other. Also carve inside the stone the picture of a standing 



-€{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


woman with a crown on her head, a club in her right hand as 
well as the following symbols: 




Stamp this stone in wax and place it in a place familiar to 
pigeons and as a result they will multiply in great numbers. 
Carving is done when it is ascendant and the hour as mentioned 
above. 

Moreover, carve on a stone of malachite the picture of a fly 
in the hour of the D when it is 21° from Q, Z is 2° from / and 
when 5 is in the first ° from %. Also carve the following 
symbols on the body of the fly: 

-and around it: 

t'vJMXrlV' 


Mount the stone on a ring in the hour when the D is 
ascendant. Place under the stone a piece of the skin of a snake. 
No flies whatsoever will enter the location or house where this 
stone is placed. 


134 


135 






-»S{Picatrix}2«- 


Additionally, when the picture of a lion with a human face 
and this symbol: 

t 

on its head is carved on a stone of lapis azure in its hour while 
ascendant, the stone will prove to be helpful for children in 
whatever circumstance they may be. 

Furthermore, if you carve this symbol: 

on a stone of bezoar in its hour and in the first phase of 69, it 
will be particularly useful in repelling scorpions. 

Additionally, if the picture of a flea surrounded by these 
letters: 

DM 


-is drawn on a stone that has the color of an ambergris, being an 
extremely strong repellent of fleas, in the hour and ascendant of 
the D, no flies will appear at all in the location of the stone. This 
effect will also be achieved in the hour of drawing and its 
ascendant. 

Also, to repel snakes, carve the picture of a snake with this 
symbol: 


136 


^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 



-on its head on a stone of lapis azure or green dahnaj in its hour 
and ascendant. This drawing is specialized to drive away 
snakes and strengthen the picture and the relationship. 

Besides, carve this figure: 



-on an emerald stone and stamp it in kundur in its hour and 
ascendant. Swallow whatever is chewed from it and this will 
promote memorization and intelligence and diminish forget¬ 
fulness. 

SATURN 

Carve on a stone of bezoar in its hour and ascendant, and 
when it is 21° from Q, the picture of a man with a wide 
forehead, long face, frowning, riding on a plow, two oxen in 
front, wearing a necklace around his neck with the head of a 
man and the head of a fox. The man is yearning for mercy. This 
picture is very effective in maintaining and promoting farms, 
cows, green crops and nursery plants. It is also effective in 
wells, rivers, stabilizing buildings, resisting aggressors, forgoing 
rancor, driving worries away and saves whoever wears it from 
fearing other people. 

To plant animosity and discord between lovers, carve this 
drawing: 


137 






-»S{Picatrixf> 


:>c +'c^<C 


-on a stone of diamond and stamp it in sediment in the hour 
and ascendant of 3. It is to be placed in a location frequented by 
them and it should be secured and not be touched or 
approached by its maker except at the time of stamping. 

Also, if you carve the picture of a standing man on a chair 
that looks like a mimbar with a semi-twisted turban on his head 
and a sickle in his hand and if you carve this picture on a stone 
of turquoise in its hour and ascendant, the holder of the stone 
will live long and have a healthy life, Allah willing. 

Carve a picture of a wolf in an amber stone in its hour and 
when % is the ascendant at 23° from <51. 9 is to be at 2° from HP 
and o' at 29° from Q. Draw these symbols: 

<>TVattt^(!f.£.tXV 


-around it and mount it on a silver ring. Flies will fly away from 
the location of the person wearing it and they will not approach 
him or the people around him. They will never appear in his 
location or enter his area at all. 

To drive away locusts, carve on a jet stone the picture of a 
locust in its hour and ascendant while it is at 2° from o' is 5° 
from nU, and the D is 3°from %. The talisman is effective at 
these degrees. Draw these symbols: 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


-around the locust. Place the skin of a rabbit under the talisman 
and no locust will enter where the talisman or its holder is 
located. 

You may also carve in any of its stones the picture of a rabbit 
in the ascendant of Q and while 5 is 13° from 3E and the © 5° 
from 69. Draw around it these symbols: 

-then mount the stone on a ring and wear it. The woman with 
whom you have a sexual relationship will not get pregnant from 
you. 

JUPITER 

Carve the picture of a man sitting on a chair with four legs 
and was a crown on his head. Each one of the chair's legs is 
lying on the neck of a standing man. All of these men have 
wings. The man on the chair is raising his hand praying to 
Allah. Carve this picture on a white onyx stone in its hour, 
when it is ascendant and in its honor. The person who wears 
this ring will become increasingly rich and prestigious. He will 
accumulate wealth, bring family members together, have many 
children and take good care of them, make the best possible 
decisions and every legal task he initiates will be well done and 
will have a good conclusions. It also wards off the plots of 
others, brings success in communication and saves the person 
wearing it from assassination. 


138 


139 







■»S{Picatrix}> 


On a stone of hyacinth draw the picture of a man with the 
face of a lion and the legs of a bird. A dragon with a head is 
under his feet. He holds in his right hand a spear stabbing the 
head of the dragon. This is to be done in its hour and in the first 
phase of the house of its honor. All the enemies of the person 
wearing this stone will be removed and fear and awe will be 
implanted in their hearts. 

Also, carve the picture of a handsome man with a ringlet 
riding on an eagle on a stone of crystal. This is to be done in the 
hour of Z and in its honor. This stone makes you favored by 
judges and people specialized in religious laws. 

Additionally, carve the picture of an eagle on the stone 
known to make giving birth easy in its hour and when the 
ascendant is the first phase of Sagittarius. If the person wearing 
this picture goes to where the birds are located for the purpose 
of catching them, they will fly down and surround him and will 
not leave him. He will also be accepted and loved by people. 
This stone is somewhat red, and there is a stone inside it which 
is loose and moves when it is moved. It secrets white liquid if it 
is rubbed. The characteristic of this stone is that if a woman 
wears it, she will never get pregnant. 

Hermes mentions that this stone is one of the blessed stones. 
If you draw the picture of a fox on the day of Z and in its hour 
while the T> is looking at it and Z is in X, mankind and jinn will 
be afraid of you, as long as you hold onto it. 

Moreover, if the picture of a nightingale is carved on this 
stone in its hour and at the home of its honor, and if this stone is 
washed and you drink from this water, you will be able to see 
the spirits and use them an any way you like. This information 
was also presented by Hermes. 

MARS 

On a magnet carve the picture of a man riding on a lion and 
raising a sword in his right hand and the head of a man in his 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}^ 


left hand. This is to be done in its hour and in the ascendant of 
its home and while it is in the second phase of HP. Its 
benevolent effects are miraculous, but its cruel effects are 
moreso. 

Carve the picture of a lion with a man standing between his 
hands on one of the stones of c f. The man is wearing a shield 
and girded with a sword, holding a sword in his right hand and 
the head of a man in his left hand. This is to be done in its hour 
and house. Whoever wears this picture will dominate and be 
feared by anyone who sees him or become associated with him. 
I saw this picture carved on a garnet stone by one of those who 
deals in this art. 

Additionally, if a picture of a lion with this symbol: 

AM 2 


-between his hands is carved on a stone of garnet its ascendant 
and hour, it will stop the bleeding from any organ of the person 
holding this stone. Be aware of that. 

Other planet talismans with miraculous effects of varying 
limitations can be made. One of these is when a talisman is 
made in the hour of the O and in the first phase of £1. This 
talisman removes the evil inclinations, and calms down the pain 
of liver, stomach and other diseases that are difficult to treat. 

Also, when a talisman is made in the hour of the D and in 
the first phase of 69, it will promote the growth of seed plants 
and various types of trees. 

Furthermore, if a talisman is made in the hour of 5 and in the 
third phase of it will help a person to recover from 
incontinence of urine and stop women's bleeding. 


140 


141 



4Picatrix}> 


As for o', when a talisman is made in its hour and in the 
third phase of HU, it will instill courage in a coward, breaks off 
the anger of a ruler, alleviates the damage caused by thieves, 
predatory animals, wolves and every other harmful creature. 

Moreover, a talisman made in the hour of 9 and when it is in 
the first phase of X helps women recover from uterus ailments, 
soothes the evil spirit suffering from melancholy, brings joy to 
the heart and promotes sexuality. A talisman made in the first 
phase of 'tf brings love and promotes distinguished deeds. 

Make a talisman in the hour of 9 when it is in the first phase 
of I to elevate intelligence, improve thinking, motivate seeking 
knowledge, promote prestige among people and so forth. 



•^Chapter Eleven}^ 


H ad we included all of what the 

ANCIENT philosophers, who specialized in this art, 
wrote on this subject, the book would have been 
very long. The purpose is to limit the text to what is 
essential for the seeker of knowledge and researcher in this 
field. This is to let you think for yourself and when the vision of 
this art becomes clear to you, do not disclose it to others. You 
should also know that only he who does not make a living out 
of this art, enjoys dealing with this art. Accordingly, such a 
person only deals with and reflects on this art to become 
distinguished. Many people do not appreciate the time it takes 
the astrologer to study and research this science. Since we know 
that this time is beyond the limits of the celestial sphere itself, 
how can we expect it to be within the capabilities of the 
astrologer? If he reaches the right conclusion, he will not be 
commended, but, if he fails, he will be insulted. Therefore, you 
should not reveal this secret to the public. The wise achieved 
these spiritual arts only through hard work, long tiring effort 
and sharp intellect. It is through sharp intellect that the wise 
may come across the right conclusion among the various and 
contradicting views and through the strong potential to correct 
it. This is an efficient process of analysis of which the right view 
is a type of reflection. In conclusion, this is the speaking of the 


143 






*»S{Picatrix}3<- 


clear mind which gives the imagination skill, clarity of approach 
and swift acceptance of what it conceives and promotes quick 
interaction with the sought result. Thus, the principle is that the 
strong acting intellect will have a weak acted upon result. For 
example, the strong interacts with difficulty and the weak 
interacts easily. 

By the same token, intelligence is the result of the efficiency 
of the intellect's expeditious perception of things without time 
or in a non-waiting time; it is the ability of the mind to make 
swift and thorough examination as well as its efficient 
perceptibility to accept the sought object without time. This is 
derived from the intelligence of fire which acts quickly and the 
intelligence of the O which penetrates air swiftly and spreads 
through it due to its clarity and fineness. This is similar to the 
intelligent who becomes intelligent due to the clarity and 
fineness of his mind. Consequently, he can imagine the sought 
objective and sense it and realize it quickly by comprehending, 
through revelation, the sought objective that the wise can sense 
and realize. Be aware of that. 

Going back to our subject, I would like to add that each 
constellation has three phases. Each phase has images, statues, 
and similarities. Additionally, they are divided among planets 
according to their height in their orbits. Thus, if the location 
happens to be at the lowest planet, it reverts to the higher and 
more distinguished planet. Moreover, they have characteristics 
and configurations comparable to the characteristics and 
configurations of their masters. As a result, constellations 
concur with their masters on the same actions as exhibited by 
their essence whether this concurrence is on agreement or dis¬ 
agreement. 

T According to the leader of this science, the image of a 
large and distinguished black mad man with red eyes 
and an ax in his hand, a white rope wrapped around 



-»^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


his waist, emerges in the first phase of HP. This is the phase of 
cC; it is a phase of cruelty, aggression, haughtiness and 
insolence. This phase is complete in its essence, character and 
instinct. The image of a woman wearing a red rope and a dress 
with one leg, probing diligently for dresses, jewelry and 
children appears in the third phase of HP. It is the phase of 9 
which denotes femininity, delicateness, cleanliness, kindness, 
entertainment and beauty. Furthermore, the image of an angry 
reddish man with red hair, unyielding look, holding a sword 
and a wooden bracelet in his hand, wearing red clothes, skillful 
in iron fabrication and wants to do good but cannot, is the 
phase for 9. 


^k^*The image of a woman with curly hair and wearing 
fiery clothes with a son whose clothes look like 
^ smothering embers appears in the first phase of V. This 
is the phase of 9. It is complete by nature and it is a phase of 
planting and cultivation, building and development, ethics and 
wisdom, as well as dividing land and engineering. 

In the second phase of O, we find the image of a man whose 
body and face look like those of a camel, his nails similar to the 
hoof of a cow, wearing an old garment, interested in developing 
land and buildings, and using cows for planting and cultivation. 
This is the phase of the D; it is a phase of ability, honor, vice¬ 
regency, destruction and oppression of constituency. 

The image of a red man with extremely white teeth 
appearing between his bps, with the body of an elephant and 
with long legs emerges in the third phase of V. Also, the image 
of a horse, a dog and a resting calf appears in the same phase. 
This is the phase of 5 and a phase of humiliation, servitude, 
torture, cruelty and disgrace. 


I The image of a beautiful woman, experienced in 
dressmaking, with two calf and two horses emerges in 
the first phase of I. This phase is also for Z and it is 


144 


145 


•^{Picatrix}> 


complete in nature. It indicates recording and accountability, 
giving and taking, knowledge itself and seeking knowledge. 

Then there is the image of a man with the face of a griffin 
tied with a turban, wearing a shield made of lead and armed 
with a helmet of iron on his head. On the top of the helmet is a 
crown made of brocade. He is holding a bow and an arrow in 
his hand. This image appears in the second phase of It. This is 
the phase of cf and it indicates trudging, motivation, speed, 
violence and unprofitable haste. 

The image of a man wearing a shield and carrying a bow and 
an arrow in its case emerges in its third phase. This is the phase 
of the O, and it indicates overlooking and missing what should 
be noticed, fun and entertainment and unemployment. 


Consider the image of a man with curved face and 
L** y fingers that looks like a horse. He has white feet and 
tree leaves are attached to his body. This image appears 
in the first phase of 69 . It is the phase of 9, and it indicates 
wittiness, mindfulness, friendliness, delicacy and cleanliness. 

There is also the image of a beautiful woman longing for 
pleasure and singing, wearing a wreath made of green basil on 
her head and holding a rod of nenuphar 36 in her hand is longing 
for pleasure and singing. This image appears in its second 
phase. This is the phase of 9, and it denotes entertainment and 
enjoyment of music as well as grace, honor and wealth. 

The image of a man holding a snake in his hand, having a 
foot similar to the foot of a turtle, and possessing golden jewelry 
appears in the third phase of 69 . This phase is for the D; it is a 
phase of tricks and driving away by force, achieving objectives 
by fighting, struggle and repulsion. 


36 A water-lily.-0£D 


146 


-^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 



The image of a man wearing dirty clothes along with the 
image of a cavalryman who looks like a wolf and a dog is 
looking to the north, appear in the first phase of 51. This 


image is for 5, and it is complete in form and nature. This is a 


phase of strength, rescue, stamina, action, attack and triumph. 


The image of a man wearing a wreath made of white basil on 


his head and holding an arrow in his hand appears in its second 
phase. This is the phase of %, and it indicates heresy, ignorance, 
perplexity, idleness of idiots, pulling out swords and fighting. 

The image of an ugly man who looks like a Negro with a 
fruit and a piece of meat in his mouth and a kettle in his hand 


appears in its third phase. This is the phase of cf, and it 
indicates friendliness, rewards, affection, participation and 
harmony. 



The image of a virgin maid wearing an old dress and 
holding a pomegranate in her hand appears in the first 
phase of TO. This is the phase of the O, and it denotes 


plowing and planting, grass and plants, buildings and wealth, 
and righteousness. 


The image of a man with a nice color wearing clothes made 
of animal skins and another made of iron appears in its second 
phase. This phase is also for 9. It is a phase depicting working, 
making a living, saving, stinginess, niggardliness and depriving 
others of their rights. 


The image of a large white man wrapped in a rope and a 


woman holding in her hand a black fawn, which is offered by 
the Magus for sacrifice, appears in its third phase. This is also 
the phase of 9; it is a phase of old age, weakness, immobility, 
chronic illness, uprooting trees and destruction of buildings. 



The image of a man holding an arrow in his right hand 
and the picture of an upside down bird in the left hand 
appears in the first phase of Q. This is the phase of the '5; 


147 


•^{Picatrix}> 


it is a phase of legitimacy, justice, fairness, protection of the 
weak and the needy from tyrants and people in powerful 
positions. This phase is complete in form and nature. 

The image of a black man leading a wedding emerges in its 
second phase. This is the phase of 5. It is a phase of relaxation, 
wealth, good living, security, peacefulness and easy living. 

The image of a man riding on a donkey and a predatory 
animal in front of him appears in its third phase. This is the 
phase of Z and it indicates sinfulness, impudence, sodomy, 
singing, entertainment and enjoyment. 


'Y"f~l The image of a man with an arrow in his right hand 
I .and an arrow in his left hand appears in the first phase 
of HU. This is also the phase of o' which is complete in 
form and nature. It indicates honor and glory, cunning and 
triumph. 

The image of a man riding on a camel and holding a 
Scorpion in his hand appears in its second phase. This is the 
phase of the O, and it indicates disgrace, scandal, tragedy and 


anger. 

The image of a horse and a snake appears in its third phase, 
and this is the phase of 9. It indicates sinfulness, impudence and 
disdainful forced marital sex achieved by subduing and anger. 


/ Consider the picture of three bodies; the first is red, the 
second is white, and the third is red. This image appears 
in the first phase of Sagitarius. It is also the phase of 9, 
and it indicates valor, activity, pleasure, patience and chivalry. 

The image of a man driving cows, a monkey and a wolf in 
front of him appears in its second phase. This is the phase of the 
D, and it indicate fright, loss, weeping, fear, sadness and 
violence. 

The image of a man wearing a cap of gold on his head killing 
another man appears in its third phase. This phase is for 5, and 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


it indicates taking risks, unwarranted involvement, exerting 
efforts in disgraceful, shameful and harmful actions. 


The image of a man holding a cane in his right hand and a hoop 
in his left hand appears in the first phase of %. This is also the 
phase of Z, and it indicates pleasure, activity, going back and 
forth, incapability, weakness and humility. 

The image of a man with a monkey in front of him appears 
in its second phase and this is the phase of c f. This phase 
delineates seeking what is known but unobtainable. 

The image of a man opening and closing a Qur'an, with the 
tail of a fish before him, appears in its third phase. This is also 
the phase of Z and it indicates intensity, desire, monopoly, 
accumulation and greed. 


W he image of a beheaded man holding a peacock appears 
in the first phase of and this is the phase of 9. It is the 
phase of hard and tiring work, poverty, need, few means 
of subsistence or lack of it. 


The image of a tenacious man who looks like a powerful 
king emerges in its second phase, and this is the phase of 9. It 
portrays beauty, nobility, goodness, complete form, complete 
religion and manhood. 


The figure of a beheaded man with an old woman in front of 


him appears in its third phase, which is the phase of the “5. This 
phase denotes ugliness, bad reputation and a scandal. 


X The picture of a man with two bodies pointing with his 
fingers appears in the first phase of X, and this is the 
phase of 5. It demonstrates little attacking with violence, 
weakness, extensive traveling, suffering, tiring, looking for 
wealth and earning a living. 

The image of an upside down man holding food in his hand 
appears in its second phase, and this is also the phase of Z. It 


149 


-»^{Picatrix}> 


indicates dignity, inspiration and the capability of dealing with 
matters of great importance. 

The image of an evil man with a woman in front of him who 
has a donkey above her and a bird in her hand appears in the its 
third phase. This phase is for o'. It indicates marital sexual 
relations, hugging, lust, intimacy, sensuous desire and a 
tendency to have leisure and relaxation time. 

As a researcher, you ought to know that these images are not 
known except to an experienced artist who has the vision of 
extracting vague matters. In other words, a planet breaks a 
planet, a boundary breaks a phase and characteristics 
intermingle such as water putting out fire, fire removing the 
coldness from water, water moisturizing dry earth and earth 
drying the moisture of water. When many characteristics exist 
and interact, the stronger will prevail over the bigger and when 
they are in equilibrium and balanced, their actions are equal 
and even. You may also know that the O becomes stronger by 
the characteristics of o', and O' gets stronger by the 
characteristics of the O. Be aware that excessive characteristics 
are damaging and harmful to their effects and actions. Sickness 
occur after perfect health and reaping occurs after crops become 
ripe. A large essence opposes the weak by its weight and 
strength and the small affects the large by it's delicacy and 
kindness. For instance, a snake kills large animals and in the 
same manner small and tiny ants in large members can kill 
strong snakes. You ought to reflect on these signs. 

Regarding these phases, you need to know what actions 
resemble a planet and what actions resemble the phase of a 
constellation. Accordingly, draw the above-mentioned images 
of bodies that resemble the particular planet when it is in that 
phase and it will subsequently produce the aforementioned 
effects and actions and expose them to the world of being and 
corruption. If it is possible to have the O rise in the hour of that 
planet or intermingle with it, its effect will be greater. As we 


150 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


mentioned above, avoid having the O in the hour of or 
intermingle with a coercive planet in order to maintain that 
effect. 



151 


^Chapter Twelve}^ 


T HE BASIC WORKS OF TALISMANS by Indian 
philosophers relied on durayjanat. 37 Every ascendant is 
divided into three equal parts, and each part is equal to 
10° and every one of those is called a durayjan. A 
durayjan is related to one of the seven planets. Accordingly, we 
say that a particular planet is the master of the durayjan, which 
means to relate the first section of the ascendant constellation to 
the master of the ascendant and the second part to the master of 
al-Khamis, the third section to the master of al-Tasi, the 
ascendant, al-Khamis and al-Tasi. These three sections are 
always in groups of threes. 

War talismans are made in the first durayjan of HT for o'. The 
possessor of this talisman will be triumphant, sheep milk 
will be clotted and its butter will be spoiled. 

Talismans for rulers and sultans are made in the second 
durayjan of HP for the O. These talismans protect against 
their harm. 

Talismans for dealing with judges and jurisprudence, 

reconciling differences between them, and uniting them are 
made in the third durayjan of HP for 2. 

Talismans for reconciling differences between men and women 


37 


Plural form of durayjan-, diminutive expression of degrees. 




-»£{Picatrix}> 


are made in the first durayjan of 9. 

Talismans for animosity, impotence and for inflicting conflict, 
especially between women are made in the second durayjan 
for 

Talismans to induce women lose their sexual interest in men 
and the same for men in women, or to make them ill and to 
separate them, are made in the third durayjan. 

Talismans tailored to promote someone losing his mind and 
becoming deranged are made in the first durayjan of It for 
9. 

In the second durayjan, a talisman can be made for 9 to return 
the absentee and runaway. 

A talisman can be made in the third durayjan for 5 to spread 
negative commendations and disclose private secrets of 
others. 

A talisman can be made in the first durayjan of 69 for the D to 
bring rain, and to bring travelers by sea and land home 
safely. 

In its second durayjan, a talisman is made for c f to prevent rain, 
snow and clouds that come from the sea and to protect 
against all harmful sea animals. 

In its third durayjan, a talisman is made for Z to ensure the 
safety of travelers by sea. 

In the first durayjan of £1, a talisman is made for the O to have 
a ruler to raise one's rank, as well as to bring predatory 
animals to any intended location. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for Z to keep wild 
and predatory animals away from cattle and herds. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for o' to make wild 
and predatory animals attack any intended town. 

In the first durayjan of HP, a talisman is made for 9 for the 
welfare of writers and to promote what they have on hand. 

In the second durayjan, a talisman is made for ? to harm 
writers. 



-*§{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


A talisman is made in the third durayjan for 9 to reconcile 
differences between spouses and promote love between 
them. 

In the first durayjan of Q, a talisman is made for 9 to promote 
excitement, love and attraction. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for 5 to create 
attraction as well. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for 9 to return a 
runaway from wherever he may be. 

In the first durayjan of IIU, a talisman is made for o' to cause 
scorpions, insects, birds and the like to attack. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for Z to prevent rain, 
scorpions and other insects, birds and the like. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for the "5 to prevent 
rain and the harmful effects of the sea. 

A talisman is made in the first durayjan of / for Z to bring 
about love and harmony. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for O' create 
excitement and bring shame and disgrace. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for the O to gain the 
sympathy of kings against judges, jurisprudence and 
prominent people. 

A talisman is made in the first durayjan of % for $ for hunting 
and for providing a superior quality of goat milk. 

A talisman is made in its second durayjan for 9 to obtain a good 
quality of all milk, and for accumulating and multiplying 
bees and birds. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for 9 to destroy what 
has been mended by the durayjan planet. 

A talisman in the first durayjan of ^ is made for ? to gain the 
love of sheikhs, slaves and agents. Also, a talisman can be 
made in the same durayjan to bring out and manage 
treasures. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for 9 to promote love 


154 


155 


-»§{Picatrix}>> 


between children and youngsters. 

A talisman is made in the third durayjan for 9 to promote love 
and attraction to women especially to each other. 

A talisman is made in the first durayjan of X for 2 to ensure 
safety in traveling by sea as well as for fishing in the sea. 

A talisman is made in the second durayjan for the D to produce 
healthy crops, induce rain and attract whales. 

A talisman is made in third durayjan for (i to promote 

favorable conditions for traveling by land. Other ta lis mans 
are made to attract hunting animals. 

These are the durayjanat which are the backbone of their 
works. They claim that these actions will not be complete except 
by truthful thinking and sound intention. Moreover, their leader 
suggests that attracting the force of planets can only be achieved 
by truthful thinking, since the high forces are but images of the 
low forces. The relationship of the low forces to them are like a 
substance, which is connected to them and thus they attract 
each other because their body essence is the same and their 
spiritual essence is also the same. Some of their Brahmans 
believe that forces are a kind creation of Allah. They are created 
to become a lesson and a source of mercy for them. 

In this regard, they developed a highly sophisticated 
encyclopedia which represented the peak of their thinking and 
the ultimate truth it reflected. In order to live up to the status of 
great law makers, become leaders and saints, and achieve 
honor, they refined and cleansed themselves from all sins. They 
started this purification in the first hour of Sunday which is the 
hour of the O and its day, and then they fast for forty days 
during which they abstained from eating meat because they do 
not see any wrong-doing committed by animals. They only ate 
what grows on land such as plants, vegetation and grains. 
Additionally, they washed themselves everyday in the hours of 
the O and the D. Some of them washed seven times a day in the 



-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


hour of planets. They observed the hours and washed at the 
beginning of each hour when the planets are in su'ud state. 
Moreover, their cleansing in the hours of the O and the D will 
add to their purification in the hours of the planets and that 
will, in turn, enhance their sanctification. At the same time, they 
start to reduce the amount of food they eat until the last day, it 
becomes one fourth of one tenth of the amount they ate on the 
first day. In the meantime and during their leisure times, they 
take the medicines they made for themselves as a substitute for 
food and water. As they do that, they develop talents, good 
memory and comprehension, astuteness and sharp intellect. 
Moreover, they will be attached less to earthly matters and 
become more inclined to transcend to the world of 
enlightenment thereby shying away from lust and sinful 
pleasures. At this point, they will be able to attract heavenly 
powers, make miracles and achieve their wishes. Additionally, 
they will recognize the predestined roles and the reality of their 
being in these roles, what has been pre-ordained for them and 
what is left for them to affect. This is their origin of 
enlightenment, and their guidance to this enlightenment is 
derived from their first holy text, Buddha's Book, which is 
considered the essence of their secrets and which no one is 
allowed to review. At the beginning of Buddha's Book, you see 
the images of the orbits of the celestial sphere, which consist of 
the enlightened souls. These souls are constantly engaged in 
worshipping the Ultimate Light. They are represented by 
drawings from the four individual elements which will be 
complete as long as the orbits of the celestial sphere are 
connected to knowledge. For this reason, Buddha's Book is 
viewed as the messenger that provides the light beams which 
connect the low forces to the Ultimate Light. At this juncture, 
they become cognizant of the nature of the mind, select the 
image that they like best, make all the laws and subsequently, 
the spirits of planets will obey them. With some of their secrets 


156 


157 


-$Picatrix}<> 


in this book, they define the realities of things. Furthermore, 
they identify the Creator as the cause of all beings and they 
believe that the things they do will provide them with a means 
to reach Him and unite with His Light. We have mentioned this 
as a reference to their basic beliefs and actions and what their 
law-makers adhere to. This is the text of what this man says: 

"If we cover all the strange things they have, this book will 
be too long. One of these is 'the head' which a generation of 
their clergy believe in. They set it next to the dragon's head. 
Then they pick a hairy, bluish, black-eyed man with connected 
eyebrows. They lure him with things he likes until they get him 
into the house of temples, and then he is undressed and placed 
in a basin full of sesame oil that covers him up to his neck. They 
close the basin leaving his head sticking out of the lid of the 
basin. They nail the cover and seal it with lead leaving the head 
out while the rest of the body is submerged in the sesame oil. 
They feed him with a certain amount of dry figs soaked in 
sesame oil and bum incense next to his nose and face. They do 
this for forty days without giving him any water. This process 
will render his bones flexible, his joints loose and his veins will 
flow abundantly; he becomes as flexible as a candle. At the 
conclusion of the forty days, they get together and discuss 
things among themselves. Then they bum incense, grab his 
head and pull it from the first vertebra. Pulling the head out of 
the body, his veins will be stretched until they all separate from 
the first vertebra, thereby leaving the body in the oil. 
Subsequently, they place it on an arch on a layer of screened 
ashes of olive and surround him with fluffy cotton. They 
perfume it with a special incense of theirs, and consequently, it 
tells them about fluctuation of prices, the overthrow of 
governments and what takes place in the world. His eyes will 
remain open and it will remind them if they miss any of their 
worshipping sacraments to the planets, prevents them from 
doing certain things and tells them what will happen to 


158 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}3«- 


everyone personally. If they ask it about knowledge and art, it 
will be able to answer their questions. Afterwards, they bring 
out the rest of the body from the basin, extract the liver and 
slice it, and they will see the signs which they are looking for. 
The bones of his shoulders and his joints will tell them about 
what they want, as well. Also, they do not cut their hair, eat or 
drink except in his name. They became public at the time of al- 
Muqtadir who ordered their temple to be opened and 
evacuated. The head was found and buried." 

One of their factions assigned colors to orbits of planets by 
using the colors of substances that accept actions. They say that 
the color of the orbit of 5 is dusty red similar to the color of 
ruby; the color of the orbit of 2 is dusty white; the color of the 
orbit of o' is yellowish green similar to the color of red gold; the 
color of the orbit of the O is dusty gold; the color of the orbit of 
9 is reddish yellow; the color of the orbit of 5 is a mixture of all 
colors; and the color of the orbit of the D is spotted white. 

Furthermore, they assigned phases to planets which indicate 
the sought actions. They also assigned talismans to these phases 
by which they can influence actions. Subsequently, they 
apportioned for every planet three phases with two talismans 
assigned for every phase. Additionally, they allocated certain 
colors for the phases. They believe that the red phase is good for 
serious and incontestable matters and every talisman made in 
this phase is good for helping someone asking for help. The 
black phase is for diseases, torture, killing and similar tragedies. 
The white phase indicate brightness, happiness and light, and 
talismans made in this phase are good for friendliness, love and 
so forth. The yellow phase is for controlling speechless animals, 
as well as for evil actions. 

They claim that the first phase of 5 is black, the second is 
white and the third phase has the color of smoke and lead. The 
first phase of % is yellow, the second is white, and the third has 
the color of smoke and lead. The first phase of o' is red, the 


159 



•»^Picatrixf> 


second is yellow and the third is rosy. The first phase of the O is 
yellow, the second is pink and the third is golden. The first 
phase of 5 is red, the second is gray and the third is rosy. The 
first phase of the D is white, the second is red and the third is 
dusty. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of 5 to black out 
the sight of the intended person so that he will not see anything. 

The second talisman is made in the first phase of 5 to black 
out the sight of the people so that they will not see you when 
you walk among them; the only thing they will be able to see is 
pitch darkness. The first talisman is made in the second phase of 
5 to reconcile the differences between two persons and bring 
harmony and friendship back to them, and it is also made in 
this phase to introduce a person to a future friend whom he has 
not yet met. The second talisman is made in the second phase of 
5 to bring back the intended person from a distant location. The 
first talisman is made in the third phase of 5 to drive away 
harmful animals. The second talisman is made in the third 
phase of 5 to repel flies and fleas from any house or town, so 
that none of these insects will ever appear in any of these 
locations. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of Z to gather 
bees from any place you want. The second is made in this phase 
by drawing a picture of a mosquito on lead to repel bees in 
particular. The first talisman in the second phase of % is made 
for fishing in seas and rivers, and the second talisman is made 
in this phase to make fishing impossible in seas and rivers. The 
first talisman in the third phase of Z is made to expel a person 
from his home and drive him away from his children, and the 
second talisman in this phase is made to repel mice from where 
the person may be staying. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of o' to triumph 
in wars and fencing, and the second talisman in this phase is 
made to kill any enemy of yours as quickly as possible. The first 


160 


-$Ghayat Al-Hakimf> 


talisman is made in the second phase of O' to bring sickness to 
any of your enemies, and the second is made to bring fever and 
derangement to whomever you like. The first talisman is made 
in the third phase of O' to render men impotent whereby they 
will not be able to have any intimate relations with women as 
well as to inhibit the relationship of women with men. The 
second talisman is made in this phase to create a schism 
between two lovers so that they will separate forever. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of the O to gain 
the favorable treatment and sympathy of emirs and rulers, and 
to have close relations with them. The second talisman in this 
phase is made to repel the assault of kings, despots and rulers, 
and to tie their tongues up. The first talisman is made in the 
second phase of the O to ward off severe and harmful cold from 
any designated location. The second talisman is made to drive 
away birds from any location you like. The first talisman of the 
third phase of the O is made to bleed a woman and a man until 
the one you choose is doomed in a short period of time. The 
second talisman in this phase is made to make a quern 38 fail to 
grind. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of 9 for bringing 
any desired woman to you, and the second is made for 
marrying any desired daughter of prominent people. The first 
talisman is made in the second phase of 9 to gain the favorable 
treatment of despots and rulers and acquire their sympathy so 
that they will not tolerate estrangement from you. The second 
talisman is made in this phase to tie up the tongues of 
whomsoever you choose from kings and rulers so that they will 
not be able to talk badly about any person who they intend to 
harm as long as the talisman is secured. The first talisman is 
made in the third phase of 9 in order for a woman to become 


38 A block of ice.-OED 


161 


-€{Picatrix}> 


subordinate to a man, and the second talisman is made in this 
phase in order to become subordinate to a woman. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of 9 for learning 
wisdom and philosophy and every fine art such as poetry and 
singing. The second talisman is made in this phase to learn the 
science of stars in particular. The first talisman is made in the 
second phase of 5 to bring children to any selected location. The 
second talisman of the second phase is made for a man to regain 
the affection and friendliness of children who dislike him. The 
first talisman is made in the third phase of 9 so that the targeted 
male will never be able to grow a beard, and the second 
talisman of this phase is made to divert rivers to any place you 
like. 

The first talisman is made in the first phase of the T> for 
bringing over any desired emirs and kings. The second talisman 
is made in this phase to make a king love whomever you want 
so much that he can not tolerate being away from him. The first 
talisman is made in the second phase of the to render the man 
you designate impotent so that he will not be able to have an 
intimate relationship with a woman. The second talisman is 
made in this phase to unlock the impotence of a man towards 
women. The first talisman is made in the third phase of the D to 
disperse and expel people from their homeland. The second 
talisman is made in the third phase of the “5 so that no harmful 
lion will stay in any place you do not want the lion to be in. 
These are the planets' talismans as they made them. 

I have come across a treatise, which deals with making 
talismans, written by Abu Bakr Ibn Muhammad Ibn Zakariyya 
Al-Razi, a well-known and distinguished Arab philosopher. I 
included this valuable treatise in my book which I entitled The 
History of Arab Philosophers. I referred to some of his miraculous 
themes he presented in this treatise. He included in this treatise 
some relationships which he claims he tested. Some of what he 
says in this regard is that talismans for sympathy, love and 


162 


-^{Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


harmony can be made either when the is in "if and connected 
to 9 in the X constellation, or when the D is in the X 
constellation connected to 9 in the "if constellation, or, finally 
when the D is in 69 and connected to 9 in the "if constellation. 
These talismans will achieve wonderful results. However, 
talismans for the worst possible malevolence can be made when 
the “D is either in 69 or Q and connected to or in conjunction 
with o' in a rising or setting constellation. Talismans for 
bloodshed can be made when the “5 is in the aerial constellation. 
Talismans made in this situation produce stronger effects. 
Moreover, talismans for animosity can be made when the D is 
either in the T* or 69 constellation, and also when it is in 5’s 
quarter phase or in conjunction with it. For rendering a person 
speechless, talismans can be made when the is under the 
beams of the O. These talismans ought to be made at night. 
Moreover, talismans for prominent personalities, kings and 
heads of state can be made when the T> is connected to the O 
while it is elevated in the O's domain. They can also be made 
when the “5 is in the middle of the sky connected to 61. You will 
be able to achieve your wishes by relying on these relationships 
when making the above talismans. As for talismans tailored for 
judges and jurisprudence, they can be made when the *5) is 
connected to Z in the I or 61 constellations while 2 is in the 
middle of the sky. Additionally, talismans for the favors of 
writers, ministers and laborers are made when the D is full and 
connected to 5 while the latter is either in the I or np 
constellations. 

You may know that the lunar quarter can lead to more 
exclusive results for every planet in producing su'ud effects 
provided that the planet is in one of the poles, the strongest of 
which is Al-Ashir. It is not recommended for nuhus effects. If 
you intend to ruin something by bringing nuhus to it, 5 and o' 
will certainly do that. By virtue of their relationship, they are 
the most effective instruments for this sort of action. 


163 






•»^{Picatrix}> 


You may also know that the D's connection to planets, when 
it is in view of the O, is similar to its connection to them when it 
is behind the O. The D's connection to the O in its third or sixth 
phase is used for achieving distinguished aims, such as 
becoming a king or a head of state or achieving prevalence and 
prominence. It will be better and more effective when it is in Al- 
Ashir than when it is in Al-Rabi or Al-Sabi. No good can be 
attained when it is waning or burning. Its connection to 9 in its 
Al-Thalith, Al-Sadis or Al-Rabi phase, as well as when it is 
facing 9, is good, but not so good as its connection to %, since Z 
is more effective in this respect. These relationships are 
naturally more instrumental in fostering the love of women, 
achieving sympathy and promoting permanent affection. This is 
especially true if the D in its Al-Thalith phase is in an earth or 
water constellation, in which case you may do whatever you 
want in an earth or water ascendant. But if Al-Thalith phase 
was in a fire or air constellation, you may do whatever you 
want in a fire or air ascendant. 

Al-Razi is a good reference for knowledge and philosophy 
due to his elaborate research in ancient arts. However, the 
absolute authority in this art is the late Abu Musa Ibn Hayyan 
Al-Sufi, may Allah bless him and benefit us from his 
knowledge. He is the author of The Book of Research on Making 
Talismans and The Major Book of Talismans, which consists of 
fifty treatises. He also wrote The Key Book on the Images of Degrees 
and Their Effects on Principles and The Comprehensive Book on the 
Astrolabe in Theory and Practice. Al-Sufi's book on the astrolabe 
covers more than a thousand chapters. Al-Sufi is a pioneer in 
his miraculous works which he presents in this book. His Major 
Book on Talismans in which he covers a great deal of knowledge, 
has been used and referred to by people looking for information 
about talismans, images, characteristics, the effects of planets 
and their natural functions and influences. Furthermore, Al-Sufi 
revived the art of equilibrium after it had fallen into oblivion. 


164 


-^Ghayat Al-Hakim}> 


Inasmuch as I became a student of this scholar and inasmuch as 
I learned from him, I pray to Allah to bestow rest and mercy on 
his soul. 

I have read two books written by Al-Muqaddim, Plato. The 
first is titled The Book of Major Laws, and the second is The Book 
of Minor Laws. He presents in the first book some of the ugly 
functions of images such as walking on water, the appearance of 
snakes in invented images that do not exist in the reed world, 
causing rain to fall in a non-rainy season and preventing it from 
falling in a rainy season, emergence of flames and luminous 
meteors, thunder and lightning in the sky, occurrence of out-of- 
season thunderbolts, setting ablaze the ships of the enemy and 
burning whomever you wish from a far distance, walking in air, 
planets rising in the wrong time and observing them when they 
are falling from their position in the sky down to the center of 
Earth, talking to the deceased, breaking up of the O and the T> 
into several pieces, transforming sticks and ropes into snakes 
that devour anyone thrown to them and covering long distances 
in no time. All of the above actions are the functions of images 
and utilizing their spiritual forces and transfusing them in their 
static primordial matters. Subsequently, these primordial 
matters become live and effective spirits that produce 
unprecedented miraculous effects and results. His philosophy 
books are replete with images which he urges everyone to know 
and pursue. He cites Pythagoras in proving that these images 
are similar to these, there are eternal spiritual essences which do 
exist, but they are beyond the mind's perception. Plato's book 
on minor laws does not match his book on major laws except 
one chapter in which he talks about the function of rational as 
well as irrational beings. He does deal with this topic in his 
major book on laws. Gabir wrote a book called The Compilation, 
in which he discusses the function of the rational being. 
However, he discusses these functions on the natural level 
whereby he seeks to compare them with the functions of nature. 


165 


^{Picatrix)^ 


As for Plato, he refers to these functions by the planet functions, 
images and spirits whose essences are natural matters. Whoever 
likes to reflect on what I have mentioned, he may do so. We will 
include in this book if we get to the appropriate point, what we 
can on this topic. We hereby conclude this treatise. 


